WASHINGTON Oct 29 (Reuters) Kaci Hickox, a U.S. nurse who has tested negative for Ebola after returning from West Africa, on Wednesday said she would challenge Maine's restrictions and did not plan to follow guidelines to quarantine herself until Nov. 10. "If the restrictions placed on me by the state of Maine are not lifted by Thursday morning, I will go to court to fight for my freedom," she said in an interview on NBC's "Today" program. In several media interviews, Hickox said she was in good health and had not had any symptoms of the virus that signal a period when an infected person would be contagious. Speaking from her home in Fort Kent, Maine, she said she had been monitoring her condition and taking her temperature twice a day. But she sharply criticized state guidelines that would require her to stay isolated at home for 21 days, saying she was "appalled" at restrictions she deemed unconstitutional and not based on science. "I don't plan on sticking to the guidelines," she told NBC. Lawyers for Hickox told ABC and NBC that Maine officials would have to go to court to get an order to enforce a quarantine and that, if the state does, their client would challenge it. Hickox worked with the medical organization Doctors Without Borders to help treat patients with the virus in Sierra Leone and fought earlier isolation in New Jersey.
Maine nurse Kaci Hickox doesn't have Ebola and she won't follow a quarantine imposed by her home state, one of her lawyers said Tuesday night. Lawyer Steven Hyman told ABC News his client will monitor herself for a fever, but she doesn't pose a risk and won't follow the quarantine. Hickox was forced to spend last weekend in quarantine at a New Jersey hospital after she returned from treating Ebola patients in Africa. She was released to Maine on Monday. Hyman's statement set off a possible legal clash as state officials vowed to get a court order, if needed, to keep anyone in quarantine who has had contact with Ebola patients, the Portland Press Herald reports. Though Hickox has tested negative for Ebola, the result was based on an early test and she could still test positive, according to Maine CDC director Dr. Sheila Pinette. For now, Hickox is quarantining herself, but she is free to do as she pleases, according to Hyman and a second lawyer for Hickox, Norman Siegel. She is staying at an undisclosed location in Maine.
On the Today Show Wednesday morning, Hickox once again made perfect sense and vowed to fight LePage as she fought Christie. "I don't plan on sticking to the guidelines. I remain appalled by these home quarantine policies that have been forced upon me, even though I am in perfectly good health and feeling strong and have been this entire time completely symptom free," said Hickox, who wouldn't emerge from Maine's 21 day voluntary quarantine until Nov. 10. "I truly believe this policy is not scientifically nor constitutionally just, and so I'm not going to sit around and be bullied around by politicians and be forced to stay in my home when I am not a risk to the American public." ... "If the restrictions placed on me by the state of Maine are not lifted by Thursday morning, I will go to court to fight for my freedom." Hickox said that she is self monitoring and is following the guidelines of Doctors without Borders, the organization she volunteered with in Africa, the organization that has been at the forefront in fighting this disease for years. Hickox also pointed out that top health officials stress that quarantine is only necessary for people who have developed symptoms of the disease, which she has not, and stressed that policies need to be based on evidence and sound public health policies as opposed to politics.
Fort Kent, Maine A nurse who was confined against her will at a New Jersey hospital after returning from West Africa where she treated Ebola patients said Wednesday that she's prepared to go to court if the state of Maine tries to quarantine her. Kaci Hickox spoke to NBC's "Today" show and ABC's "Good Morning America" from Fort Kent, where her boyfriend is a senior nursing student. She said she had no contact with anyone Tuesday and will have no human contact again Wednesday. But Hickox says if the restrictions aren't lifted by Thursday, she will go to court to fight for her freedom. "I don't plan on sticking to the guidelines," Hickox said on "Today". "I remain appalled by these home quarantine policies that have been forced upon me even though I am in perfectly good health." Hickox, who volunteered in Africa with Doctors Without Borders, was the first person forced into New Jersey's mandatory quarantine for people arriving at Newark Liberty International Airport from three West African countries. Hickox, who spent the weekend in a quarantine tent, said she never had Ebola symptoms and tested negative in a preliminary evaluation, and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo were sharply criticized for ordering mandatory quarantines. "I am not going to sit around and be bullied by politicians and forced to stay in my home when I am not a risk to the American public," she said. On Tuesday, Department of Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said her department and the attorney general's office were prepared to take legal steps to enforce a quarantine if someone declines to cooperate. "We do not want to have to legally enforce in home quarantine," she said. "We're confident that selfless health workers who were brave enough to care for Ebola patients in a foreign country will be willing to take reasonable steps to protect residents of their own country." Hickox said Wednesday that she remains concerned by the mandatory quarantines. "I truly believe that this policy is not scientifically or constitutionally just," she said. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said over the weekend. "Anyone who has heard nurse Hickox explain her situation in her proud, compassionate, intelligent voice knows that what happened to her was inappropriate," "Each government has to make decisions. We understand that.... But the problem here is this hero is coming back from the front, having done the right thing, was treated with disrespect was treated with a sense that she had done something wrong when she hadn't. We owe her better than that."
FORT KENT, Maine (AP) A nurse who was confined against her will at a New Jersey hospital after returning from West Africa where she treated Ebola patients said Wednesday that she's prepared to go to court if the state of Maine tries to quarantine her.Kaci Hickox spoke to NBC's "Today" show and ABC's "Good Morning America" from Fort Kent, where her boyfriend is a senior nursing student.She said she has so far abided by the state's voluntary quarantine. She had no contact with anyone Tuesday and will have no human contact again Wednesday, she said.But Hickox says if the restrictions aren't lifted by Thursday, she will go to court to fight for her freedom."I don't plan on sticking to the guidelines," Hickox said on "Today". "I remain appalled by these home quarantine policies that have been forced upon me even though I am in perfectly good health."Hickox, who volunteered in Africa with Doctors Without Borders, was the first person forced into New Jersey's mandatory quarantine for people arriving at Newark Liberty International Airport from three West African countries.Hickox, who spent the weekend in a quarantine tent, said she never had Ebola symptoms and tested negative in a preliminary evaluation, and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo were sharply criticized for ordering mandatory quarantines."I am not going to sit around and be bullied by politicians and forced to stay in my home when I am not a risk to the American public," she said.On Tuesday...
President Barack Obama threw his weight behind American health care workers who have fought the Ebola virus in Africa as one nurse was preparing to fight moves to force her into quarantine in her own state. As Kaci Hickox, who worked in Sierra Leone, heading for a standoff with Paul le Page, the governor of Maine, the US president called for Americans to react with common sense rather than hysteria. Speaking in the White House and flanked by doctors and nurses who had worked at Ebola hit countries in West Africa, President Obama hailed the work they had done. "They represent citizenship, patriotism and public service at its best," he said. "When they come home, they deserve to be treated properly like the heroes that they are." Many will see the President's remarks as a pointed vote of confidence for Ms Hickox, especially with the White House opposing the compulsory quarantine restrictions being imposed by a number of states. He said "If we discourage our health workers who are prepared to make these sacrifices from travelling to countries where they are needed, then we are not doing the job of protecting our people." In Maine meanwhile Ms Hickox said she will defy any attempts to force her to remain in quarantine at her home town of Fort Kent. She returned to northern Maine on Monday after New Jersey officials, facing the threat of legal action, reluctantly released her from quarantine. Now Paul le Page, the Republican governor of Maine, has signalled he is ready to act to force Ms Hickox, 33, to remain in quarantine for 21 days. "We hoped that the health care worker would voluntarily comply with these protocols, but this individual has stated publicly she will not abide by the protocols," Mr LePage said. "We are very concerned about her safety and health and that of the community. "We are exploring all of our options for protecting the health and well being of the health care worker, anyone who comes in contact with her, the Fort Kent community and all of Maine." Police officers have been stationed outside her home which she shares with her boyfriend in the small town of Fort Kent. However Tom Pelletier, the local police chief, said the officer had been deployed for her own safety amid fears of a backlash against the nurse. A Facebook page has already been set up by one group opposing Ms Hickox's return to her home state. It has attracted more than 1,100 "likes". Ms Hickox had been quarantined following her return from Sierra Leone, after a thermometer showed she had a slight temperature on her arrival at Newark Liberty airport. Having secured her freedom and following successive tests declaring that she was free of the Ebola virus, Ms Hickox signalled her defiance in interview with NBC. "I remain appalled by these home quarantine policies that have been forced upon me, even though I am in perfectly good health and feeling strong and have been this entire time completely symptom free," she said.
Nurse Kaci Hickox said Wednesday she will sue the state of Maine if it doesn't drop isolation restrictions. Hickox on Friday became the first person to be isolated under New Jersey's Ebola quarantine policy. She had flown into Newark Liberty International Airport on her way home from treating Ebola patients in West Africa. She was relocated to Maine on Monday after spending three days in an isolation tent in Newark. Maine's protocols also require a 21 day quarantine, but speaking on NBC's Today Show Wednesday, Hickox said she would not comply. "This policy is not scientifically nor constitutionally just. So I am not going to sit around and be bullied by politicians and forced to stay in my home when I am not a risk to the American public." Maine health officials say they are prepared to legally enforce the state's quarantine on health care workers who've treated Ebola patients, but Department of Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew declined to comment specifically on Hickox. Hickox says she is currently still adhering to the conditions, but if Maine does not lift her isolation restrictions by Thursday morning she will fight it in court.
The small town of Fort Kent, Maine about 160 miles north of Bangor is suddenly the epicenter of the debate over Ebola in the US. Nurse Kaci Hickox has vowed to fight an Ebola quarantine that she says violates her rights, becoming the focal point of America's controversial response to the disease. But, while she has received the support of health care organizations, it's not clear how her case will fare in court. The nurse, who has not been diagnosed with Ebola or treated for any symptoms, spent four weeks helping care for Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with the organization Doctors Without Borders. She flew back to New Jersey on Friday, where she was quarantined for three days in an isolation tent. Under significant outside pressure including from President Obama New Jersey officials released Ms. Hickox Monday. She then traveled back to her home state of Maine, where she was placed under quarantine again. "I truly believe this quarantine policy is not scientifically or constitutionally just," Hickox said in an interview on the "Today" show Wednesday morning. "I am not a risk to the American public." Also on Wednesday, Doctors Without Borders expressed their support for the nurse in a statement, calling the quarantine measures "excessive." Hickox has said if Maine does not lift the quarantine by Thursday, she will challenge it in court. The state, meanwhile, said it will seek legal authority to enforce the quarantine. "We hoped that the healthcare worker would voluntarily comply with these protocols, but this individual has stated publicly she will not abide by the protocols," Gov. Paul LePage said in a statement on the governor's website. "We are very concerned about her safety and health and that of the community. ... While we certainly respect the rights of one individual, we must be vigilant in protecting 1.3 million Mainers, as well as anyone who visits our great state." In terms of legal precedents, there are several cases of state and federal governments enforcing quarantines on people in emergency situations. A case that has been frequently cited this week is Jacobson v. Massachusetts, where the US Supreme Court in 1905 upheld the commonwealth's compulsory vaccination law, which called for resisters to be thrown in jail, saying that personal liberties could be suspended given outside circumstances. "As a legal matter, it's almost impossible to find a case that has successfully challenged whether someone who has been exposed to an infectious disease should be quarantined," says Eugene Kontorovich, a law professor at Northwestern University. There is, however, less direct precedent on challenges to the permissible scope and circumstances of quarantine and this is where Hickox could find the most success should her case go to court in Maine, according to legal experts. "There have indeed been a few cases here of people who have challenged the nature of their confinement," Professor Kontorovich adds, "but those were much harsher conditions where people were quarantined by being put in jail, or quarantined with other infected people."
Nurse Kaci Hickox, who recently returned from treating Ebola victims in West Africa and has challenged the legality of a quarantine, spoke outside of her Maine home after health officials announced they are seeking a court order to force her to stay home in quarantine for three weeks over public health concerns. Hickox walked out of her Fort Kent home Wednesday night, defying the Maine CDC's protocol for health care workers who have treated Ebola patients. Maine Nurse Slams Quarantine I'm Not Going to Be Bullied "We have to make decisions based on science," she told reporters while standing outside with her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur. "You could hug me. You could shake my hand and not get Ebola." The state wants people who have had direct contact with Ebola patients to remain home and avoid public contact until the virus' 21 day incubation period had passed, and it will seek court orders to force them to if they don't of their own accord, officials said at a Wednesday press conference in Augusta. Made Pariahs for Helping? Ebola Aid Groups Struggle "Our true desire is for a voluntary separation from the public. We do not want to legally enforce an in home quarantine unless absolutely necessary," Maine Commissioner of Health and Human Services Mary Mayhew said. "However, we will pursue legal authority if necessary to ensure risk is minimized for all Mainers." Mayhew defended the state's effort to enforce what it continued to call a "voluntary" quarantine, saying it reflected a "common sense approach" that would "guard against a public health crisis in Maine." VideoWho Is Craig Spencer, 1st New York Ebola Patient? The court order seeking to force Hickox to remain home will ideally be filed Wednesday, Mayhew said. Officials also said state troopers are outside of her door waiting to tail her and see who she comes into contact with if she leaves home. Earlier on Wednesday, Hickox, a nurse who had first been quarantined in New Jersey's Newark Liberty International Airport over the weekend and was released after showing no symptoms, told Matt Lauer on "Today" that she wasn't abiding by Maine CDC's recommendation the state's CDC recommendation is more strict than federal guidelines. "I truly believe this policy is not scientifically nor constitutionally just, and so I'm not going to sit around and be bullied around by politicians and be forced to stay in my home when I am not a risk to the American public," Hickox said. Gov. Paul LePage said in a statement earlier on Wednesday that while he's concerned with the safety and health of Hickox and the community of Fort Kent, the state is "exploring all of our options for protecting the health and well being" of Hickox and the community. "While we certainly respect the rights of one individual, we must be vigilant in protecting 1.3 million Mainers, as well as anyone who visits," LePage's statement said. For up to the minute news and weather, be sure to follow us on Twitter and like us on Facebook. Sign up for our new breaking news email alerts by clicking here.
"If the restrictions placed on me by the State of Maine are not lifted by Thursday morning, I will go to court to fight for my freedom," she said. Hickox spoke by Skype from Fort Kent, where she has been told to stay until the 21 day observation period ends next month. She says she remains symptom free and therefore not a threat to anyone. The 33 year old nurse has become the face of a nationwide debate over treatment of health care workers returning from West Africa. The controversy erupted Friday when New York and New Jersey announced mandatory quarantines for such workers arriving in those states. Hickox arrived at Newark Liberty International Airport in New Jersey that afternoon and was swiftly placed in isolation in a tent at University Hospital. Hickox has denied Gov. Christie's assertion that she was running a fever. On Monday, Christie let Hickox go home to Maine. By then, Maine had announced a similar quarantine program and said Hickox had to stay inside until the 21 day incubation period for Ebola had ended. Asked what risk Hickox could pose to the public if she were not symptomatic, Mayhew said "There are other cases where individuals have not tested positive . . . and quickly developed symptoms when they were out in public." Critics, including the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the White House, say the forced quarantines are not based on science and will discourage health care workers from volunteering to go to Africa to fight Ebola. The aid group Doctors Without Borders, for whom Hickox was working in West Africa, condemned "blanket forced quarantines" on Wednesday, calling such policies "not based upon established medical science."
387 CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 1 COMMENTEMAILMORE FORT KENT, Maine. Gov. Paul LePage said Wednesday that Ebola nurse Kaci Hickox was "unwilling" to follow state health guidelines and that he was seeking legal authority to force her to remain quarantined at a rural home in Maine for 21 days. Hickox, who does not have any symptoms of the deadly virus, said Wednesday that she would not abide by quarantine rules that she said were "not scientifically nor constitutionally just." "I don't plan on sticking to the guidelines," Hickox tells Today Show's Matt Lauer via Skype. "I am not going to sit around and be bullied by politicians and forced to stay in my home when I am not a risk to the American public." Hickox, a 33 year old nurse with Doctors Without Borders, arrived in Maine on Monday after being forcibly held in an isolation tent in New Jersey for three days under that state's strict new law for health care workers who have recently treated Ebola patients in West Africa. Two state police cars were stationed Wednesday outside the rural home of her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, in Fort Kent where she has been living, WLBZ TV reports. Northern Maine Medical Center says Hickox had originally agreed to a 21 day quarantine, according to WLBZ. NMMC also said Wilbur had also agreed to a self quarantine for 21 days and will be taking UMaine Fort Kent nursing classes online. There is no word on whether he would abide by quarantine for the full period. Hickox, according to her attorney, had only agreed to remain home for two days after arriving from New Jersey. LePage said Wednesday that Hickox had been "unwilling" to follow state protocols and that he will seek legal authority to enforce the quarantine. All windows at Kaci Hickox 39 s boyfriend home are blocked. WLBZ2pic.twitter.com dSpRaFZAP7 Kaitlyn Chana ( KaitlynChana) October 29, 2014 The governor's office said state police were stationed the home "for both her protection and the health of the community." Windows on Wilbur's frame house, which is located in a wooded area, are blocked and two vehicles are parked in the driveway. A male voice responded to a knock at the door by saying, "Hey, thanks for calling." Fort Kent is a town of more than 4,000 located near the Canadian border. "We hoped that the healthcare worker would voluntarily comply with these protocols, but this individual has stated publicly she will not abide by the protocols," LePage said in a statement on the governor's website. "We are very concerned about her safety and health and that of the community," he said. "We are exploring all of our options for protecting the health and well being of the healthcare worker, anyone who comes in contact with her, the Fort Kent community and all of Maine. While we certainly respect the rights of one individual, we must be vigilant in protecting 1.3 million Mainers, as well as anyone who visits our great state." Hickox was the first person pulled aside at Newark Liberty International Airport on Friday under new state regulations after her return from Sierra Leone, where she was working with Ebola patients. She told Today she will pursue legal action if Maine forces her into continued isolation. "If the restrictions placed on me by the state of Maine are not lifted by Thursday morning, I will go to court to fight for my freedom," she says. Her attorney, Steven Hyman, told CNN Wednesday that his client had received no mandatory orders and that "the next step is up to Maine." "The only reason that there is a cry for quarantine is because the political side has decided that it would just be better if she stayed home and lost her civil right so we could all feel more comfortable, which is not supported by any medical evidence," Hyman said. Without naming Hickox specifically, Department of Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said Tuesday evening that the state has the authority to seek a court order to compel quarantine for individuals deemed a public health risk. "We have made the determination that out of an abundance of caution, this is a reasonable, common sense approach to remove additional risk and guard against a public health crisis in Maine," said Mayhew. She did not mention Hickox by name. Many in Fort Kent have commended Hickox's efforts in West Africa, but have expressed fear. Hickox's has been receiving death threats on social media and anger about her not following the quarantine. Others have called for a more measured response. "Treat Ms. Hickox with the same compassion and support that she displayed in West Africa, rather than fear," said Maine Bishop Robert Deeley. Hickox's high profile campaign from isolation in New Jersey, including a first person account in The Dallas Morning News, underscored the shifting response to the Ebola crisis by state and federal authorities. On Friday, New York Gov. Chris Christie and New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced a plan of mandatory quarantine for health care workers back from Africa who had been exposed to Ebola but showed no symptoms. It was in part a reaction to the case of Craig Spencer, a New York City physician who tested positive for Ebola, but acknowledged he had left his apartment and moved around the city just before experiencing Ebola symptoms. Saying they couldn't rely on voluntary self reporting, the governors pronounced themselves resolved to err on the side of caution and monitor people such as Spencer under confinement. Cuomo, however, quickly eased those rules, allowing such health care workers to self quarantine at home. The White House also weighed in, saying it had conveyed concerns to the governors of New York and New Jersey that their stringent quarantine policies were "not grounded in science" and would hamper efforts to recruit volunteers to fight the epidemic in Africa. Christie said he had not heard from the White House before the plan was announced. After the uproar in New Jersey, Hickox was allowed to leave on Monday, but Christie insisted that it did not represent a change of policy. "I didn't reverse any decision," he said Tuesday. "She hadn't had any symptoms for 24 hours. And she tested negative for Ebola. So there was no reason to keep her. The reason she was put into the hospital in the first place was because she was running a high fever and was symptomatic." "If people are symptomatic they go into the hospital," Christie said. "If they live in New Jersey, they get quarantined at home. If they don't, and they're not symptomatic, then we set up quarantine for them out of state. But if they are symptomatic, they're going to the hospital." Hickox told The Dallas Morning News that her brief fever spike, recorded by a forehead scanner at the airport, was the result of being flushed and angry over her confinement and that an oral temperature reading at the same time showed her to be normal. Contributing Kaitlyn Chana report for WLBZ TV in Bangor Rick Hampson in New York Associated Press 387 CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 1 COMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story http www.firstcoastnews.com story news nation 2014 10 29 maine aims to enforce nurse ebola quarantine 18147335
The Doctors Without Borders nurse fighting state imposed Ebola quarantines, first in New Jersey and now in Maine, has threatened to challenge the restrictions in court. "If the restrictions placed on me by the state of Maine are not lifted by Thursday morning, I will go to court to fight for my freedom," Kaci Hickox told Matt Lauer of the "Today" show via Skype. Last Friday, Hickox arriving at Newark airport from Sierra Leone, where she was working with Ebola patients. She was detained for seven hours at the airport and then placed in an isolation tent with no shower or flushable toilet after a second temperature reading indicated fever. She tested negative for the virus and was allowed to leave on Monday after waging a media war against Republican Gov. Chris Christie's 21 day quarantine policy for healthcare workers exposed to Ebola. Now back in her home state of Maine, Hickox again finds herself at odds with state officials who expect her to remain quarantined at home for 21 days, the incubation period for Ebola. Since she left New Jersey, she hasn't had a fever or tested positive for the virus. Could she win a court fight? Under Maine law, there has to be an "actual or threatened epidemic" to impose a quarantine. Paul Millus, a civil rights attorney who is not representing Hickox, told The Washington Post in an e mail the state could have a hard time proving that as Hickox hasn't shown symptoms. "Moreover, it is not quite clear that they would be able, medically speaking, to produce clear and convincing evidence that would require Ms. Hickox to quarantine," he said. Hickox's lawyer, Norman Siegel, told the Bangor Daily News "The conditions that the state of Maine is now requiring Kaci to comply with are unconstitutional and illegal and there is no justification for the state of Maine to infringe on her liberty." Siegel previously described New Jersey's policy, which is similar to Maine's, as "overly broad" a phrase that hints what his legal strategy may be if Hickox decides to file suit. Lawrence Gostin, a Georgetown University professor who heads the O'Neill Institute for National and Global Health Law, told the Wall Street Journal this is the first time he can recall the government imposing a quarantine on a class of people doctors exposed to Ebola rather than on a case by case basis depending on symptom. "That pushes the envelope more than I've seen it in my lifetime," he said. "We are basically depriving individuals of liberty for 21 days just because they have traveled from a particular part of the world. That seems to me wrong legally and ethically and is against science." If a court agrees Maine is depriving Hickox of her liberty in violation of the Constitution, it could strike the state's quarantine law down for being too broad. However, some legal experts are skeptical this argument will succeed. Writing for the Volokh Conspiracy, Eugene Kontorovich pointed out courts, including the Supreme Court, have deferred to the authority of state health officials in public health emergencies. Quarantines are rare and there are few relevant cases Hickox's lawyer acknowledged they "could be setting a precedent." But Kontorovich claims the few cases on the books don't bode well for Hickox "A brief review of the cases suggests it extremely difficult to challenge such an action without a clear showing of medical unreasonableness, or discriminatory application," he wrote. "Indeed, I found no cases in which a quarantine has been lifted due process grounds (though there have been some successful challenges to conditions of quarantine)." In addition, he noted modern quarantine cases dealt with tuberculosis and smallpox, which are less lethal than Ebola. "All this shifts the presumption of validity even more towards the state," he wrote, noting courts weigh the validity of the government's interest against the individual's right to liberty. While states are given broad authority, there are some limits on what they can do in the name of protecting public health. Basically, they can't do anything "arbitrary, oppressive and unreasonable," a legal standard sometimes applied when people claim they've been deprived of liberty. Another claim Hickox could pursue is false imprisonment the crime of restraining someone without justification. Given court deference to state authority on public health matters, this claim is unlikely to succeed. Consider the case of a woman known to history only as "Ms. Crayton." In 1911, New York health officials quarantined her for 15 days because she lived in a house close to someone with smallpox. Crayton sued the state for advertising to the town that she had been exposed to a "a loathsome disease, was unfit to be at large or pursue her occupation, and thereby deprived her of her earnings, injured her feelings, held her up to ridicule, and caused her to be shunned by her fellow citizens." She lost. A state appeals court ruled even an error in judgment on the part of health officials didn't amount "unreasonable and arbitrary" action. Related Maine Gov. Paul LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce Ebola quarantine on nurse
By Martin Gould In Fort Kent, Maine and Louise Boyle for MailOnline Already pushing the boundaries of her state imposed quarantine, Ebola nurse Kaci Hickox defiantly left the Maine home she was ordered to stay inside for three weeks on Wednesday night in order to speak with the press about her 'frustrating' situation. Standing out front of her boyfriends house in Fort Kent about 7pm, as the police tasked with watching her looked on from across the street, Hickox told the waiting media contingent that she will continue to fight her quarantine orders, even if she is charged for breaking them. 'We have been in negotiations all day with the state of Maine and tried to resolve this amicably, but they are not allowing me to leave my house and interact with the public even though I am completely healthy and symptom free,' Hickox said, according to The Press Herald. 'I am frustrated by this fact, and I have been told that it is the Attorney General's intention to file legal action against me. 'And if this does occur, I will challenge the legal actions.' Hickox shook the hand of a British reporter at the scene. 'You could hug me. You could shake my hand. I would not give you Ebola,' Hickox said. Hickox believes she flew into New Jersey from treating dying Ebola patients in West Africa on 'the wrong day'. She claims that many other aid workers have entered the country and continue to do so without having to go through what she had. Hickox said she remains healthy and has not shown any Ebola symptoms and that the measures she's being forced to comply with are over the top. However residents of the tiny Maine town where is staying have said that '21 days (of quarantine) is better is better than 21 deaths' and that it is a necessary precaution. 'I'm upset that Chris Christie ever let her go from New Jersey,' said resident Anne Dugal. 'He should have kept her there longer. 'She says she only had a temperature of 101 because she got upset. No one shows a temperature because they're upset. She should stay inside.' Hickox did not address whether she still planned to leave the house on Thursday during the press conference, as she said on TV earlier in the day. Ted WIlbur, Hickox's boyfriend, had walked over to the police parked across the street from their house to check Hickox would not be arrested for leaving the house. She did not go any further than the driveway and police remained across the street for the press conference. Attacks on Hickox have come thick and fast after she told both NBC's 'Today' show and ABC's 'Good Morning America' that she planned to stay in her home on the outskirts of Fort Kent only for one day after being driven back from New Jersey. Maine Governor Paul LePage stationed state troopers outside the house that Hickox, 33, shares with her boyfriend Ted Wilbur, setting the stage for a showdown should she decide to leave. The governor's office did not say whether the nurse would be arrested if she tried to leave, but said state police were stationed outside the home 'for both her protection and the health of the community.' It is unclear whether the troopers would have the legal authority to arrest Hickox if she decided to leave, because the state's guidelines are voluntary. But LePage wants to make it mandatory and enforceable with a court order. State Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew told reporters in the capital Augusta When it is made clear by an individual in this risk category that they do not intend to voluntarily stay at home for the remaining 21 days, we will immediately seek a court order.' According to NBC the hearing is not likely to be held until Monday the day before LePage faces re election and four days after Hickox has vowed to leave her home. 'If I saw her in the street I wouldn't go near her,' said Dugal. 'Twenty one days is not that long a time.' Novelist Cathie Pelletier, sitting at the next table to Dugal, agreed. 'It's not a case that she can say sorry if she is wrong and dozens of people get infected,' she said. 'I can't understand why she can't just stay at home those extra few days.' But both the town's chief of police, Tom Pelletier Cathie's third cousin and Dr. Michael Sullivan, the chief medical officer at Fort Kent's hospital the Northern Maine Medical Center, said they wanted to shake Hickox's hand and thank her for the work she has been doing helping the sick. The conflicting views go to the heart of the confusion surrounding the approach taken by the federal government, the CDC, and individual states to the Ebola crisis and quarantine rules. They came as many took to Facebook to slam Hickox for refusing to lock herself away for three weeks and at the medical center where panicked patients are canceling appointments even though Hickox has gone nowhere near it, the hospital's boss said. Hickox and Wilbur returned to their three bedroom home on the outskirts of Fort Kent under cover of darkness on Tuesday night after a stopover at his uncle's house in Freeport, Maine. They had driven nearly 500 miles from Newark, N.J. where she had been held in quarantine following her arrival in the United States from Africa. Hickox, 33, had been treating Ebola sufferers in Sierra Leone with the medical charity Doctors Without Borders. She has shown no signs of the disease but a forehead thermometer showed she had a slight temperature when she arrived at Newark Liberty International airport, which she has put down to being flustered or a faulty thermometer. Christie departed from national policy and had tried to confine her to a tent inside a hospital for 21 days. But after she threatened legal action and the White House intervened, she was allowed to travel on the understanding that she would put herself in voluntary isolation in accordance with Maine state guidelines. But Hickox has since declared that she will not be bullied by 'appalling' confinement rules and plans to fight for her freedom if restrictions are not lifted by Maine officials on Thursday. Hickox has said she would abide by all the self monitoring requirements of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. This does not stop people from traveling outside their home, but instead advises them not to go to large gatherings. It also calls on them to take a series of tests twice a day to monitor whether they are developing symptoms. Doctors insist that the virus is not contagious until symptoms develop. On Wednesday morning, Hickox, 33, told Today 'I don't plan on sticking to the (Maine's) guidelines. I am not going to sit around and be bullied by politicians and forced to stay in my home when I am not a risk to the American public.' Pelletier, who has been chief since May after retiring as a sergeant from the Maine State Police said he has absolutely no reservations about speaking face to face with Hickox. 'She just had the misfortune of landing at the wrong airport' he said. 'If Gov. Christie had a plan in place on legal grounds, I guess he would have followed through on it, but he allowed her to leave, which must have meant that he felt safe, and she returned here.' But LePage said 'While we certainly respect the rights of one individual, we must be vigilant in protecting 1.3 million Mainers, as well as anyone who visits our great state.' Hickox's home is just a mile from the Canadian border and three miles out of the center of Fort Kent, a town known for an annual dogsledding race and home to a training center for the Winter Olympic sport of biathlon. Meanwhile, Peter Sirois, chief executive officer of the Northern Maine Medical Center, said more than 10 procedures had so far been put off at the local hospital. 'People are canceling X rays and other elective procedures,' said Sirois. 'Those cancelations are totally inappropriate because Kaci Hickox was never here and even if she had been, the public would be perfectly safe.' The furor came after President Obama appeared to condemn Governor Christie in a speech on Tuesday on the lawn of the White House. And then today the president appeared with healthcare workers who were still in the 21 day risk period at the White House and hit out at critics who were 'hiding under the covers' rather than backing those brave enough to travel to Africa and fight the raging epidemic there. His words have so far done little to reassure the public. A Kaci Hickox Supporters site has been swamped with messages attacking her despite a warning that any negative statements would be met with a ban from the site. Candie Archambeau wrote 'You are a nurse! Don't you take some sort of oath? Shame on you for being so selfish! Block me, i could care less! Hope you are proud of yourself and feel accomplished when someone dies because of you and your ignorance!!!!!!' And Andrew Roach added 'She is not a hero she is a idiot who only cares for herself. She is a disgrace to every medical professional!' Hickox was further attacked on her own Facebook community page for the interviews she gave Wednesday to Good Morning America and Today and the piece she wrote for the Dallas Morning News in which she threatened to sue for freedom from quarantine. Jackie Fowler wrote 'Sorry Nurse Hickox I too am a nurse, and while I applaud your decisions to care for those less fortunate in other lands, I cannot stand by your decision to write egregious op ed pieces and file suits. 'In my mother's era, people suspected to have measles, scarlet fever, and polio were quarantined and no one thought negatively about it. Your behaviours put more negative light on nursing, which has borne the burden of negativity for years. Shame on you.' Another Facbook page, Mainers against Kaci Hickox returning home to Fort Kent Maine, was also filled with hate. 'WE have the right to KEEP HER IN LOCKDOWN until she is safe from infecting US,' wrote Moe Bundy. And Laurie Lee added ' She volunteered to go to a filthy, dirty, disease ridden country and she thinks a tent in NJ is a cruel punishment? Something wrong with this, something wrong with her too. 'If she gets sick in the next couple of weeks she will find herself to be the most hated woman in America, no matter how much good she did for a bunch of strangers in a strange land, she'll wish she'd stayed in the tent.' Meanwhile, Hickox insisted today that her elevated temperature of 101F which is considered an Ebola symptom was caused by a faulty thermometer and the chaos at Newark last Friday. She said 'This whole time I have been symptom free. I believe the forehead scanner was inaccurate. My temperature was normal when taken by oral thermometer.' She said that she understood the Ebola fears among the public, but added 'The issue at Newark Airport is different I saw complete disorganization, no leadership and if you're going to put a policy like that in place that impedes on my civil rights, you need to have it worked out before you start detaining me in an airport.' Miss Hickox appeared on the Today show via Skype today where she told host Matt Lauer that she was appalled by mandatory quarantine policies, adding 'They are not based on science or evidence. 'If the restrictions by Maine are not lifted by Thursday morning, I will go to court to get my freedom.' Her lawyer, civil rights attorney Norman Siegel, told Today that there was absolutely no basis in medical science to quarantine his client at this time. The 33 year old nurse believes authorities should follow the reasonable steps of an organization like Doctors Without Borders who recommend 'self monitoring twice a day and if you develop symptoms then you need to be tested'. Miss Hickox said 'I truly believe that this policy is not scientifically or constitutionally just. I am not a risk to the American public. Of course I do understand that it has created a lot of fear but we have to make policies based on evidence. She added 'We need more education about the disease and should not be taking these mixes messages from politicians. Currently, I am the one that's suffering.' The nurse plans to return to West Africa in the future to help in the fight against Ebola. Northern Maine Medical Center chief nursing officer Alain Bois told reporters that should Hickox develop symptoms she would be isolated in a special quarantine area at the 49 bed hospital before being transferred to Bangor, a three hour drive away. He insisted that unlike the quarantine area that Christie kept her in in New Jersey it had a proper flush toilet and a shower. Dr. Sullivan, who praised Hickox for her dedication to helping the sick added 'I understand people's concern. It is a scary disease and I understand it is the governor's job to reassure the public that he is doing what is necessary to protect the public. 'It is difficult to balance that with scientific evidence especially as things are changing such as the level of protection for medical staff.
FORT KENT, Maine Kaci Hickox, the nurse undergoing an in home Ebola quarantine in Maine, stepped out of her house for the first time Wednesday night to speak out against the policy under which she is confined. She says she has not committed to staying at home because she doesn't have any Ebola symptoms since returning from Sierra Leone to battle the disease. Hickox says Maine's Ebola protocols, which require in home quarantine for those exposed to the virus even if they don't show any symptoms, are not based on science. "I don't want to hurt anyone in the public, but I don't think this is an acceptable line to be drawn," she says. Hickox says she attempted to create a compromise with state health officials, in which she would restrict her travel and continue direct active monitoring of her health. But she says those attempts proved unsuccessful. "There are things we know work, and all aid workers are willing to do those things, but I'm not willing to stand here and have my civil rights be violated when it's not science based," Hickox says. Maine's health commissioner says the state is seeking legal action to ensure Hickox complies with the in home quarantine. Hickox says she will fight any legal challenge and is taking a stance on behalf of other health care workers.
(MyFoxBoston.com) A national showdown over a mandatory Ebola quarantine is happening in New England. A nurse from Maine says she's not sick and vows to fight officials who want her to stay inside her home. On Thursday morning, the issue could go to court. Kaci Hickox stepped outside of her house last night in an act of defiance, claiming her civil rights are being violated. The 33 year old says she'll give the state of Maine until Thursday morning to lift the 21 day home quarantine requirement. If they don't, she'll seek legal action. The state says if Hickox doesn't comply, then they'll take her to court. Earlier this month, Hickox served with Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone, she returned to the United States on October 24 and was put under quarantine after screeners at the airport determined she had a fever. Hickox claims she was distressed and a little bit upset at the airport, so her cheeks were flushed and she was warm, but she never had a fever. Hickox insists she has felt fine and that she's twice tested negative for Ebola, but Maine health officials claim the quarantine is necessary. Officials claim that people can test negative, believe they are not symptomatic, but quickly developed symptoms while they are out in the public. Health officials claim the 21 day quarantine is a reasonable request, but Hickox says that the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side and vows to challenge any legal action. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel announced yesterday that all U.S. troops returning from Ebola stricken nations will undergo a 21 day quarantine. Hickox says she will pursue legal action if the quarantine isn't lifted as of Thursday morning. Police say they will monitor her movements if she does leave her home.
Nurse Kaci Hickox, who worked with Ebola patients in West Africa and who is currently under a 21 day quarantine, is giving a tough time to officials in Maine by continuing to be vocal against the state's quarantine policy and threatening to break her voluntary isolation. Ms. Hickox, 33, returned to New Jersey October 24 after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone for five weeks as part of humanitarian aid organization Doctors Without Borders. Upon her return, she was put into quarantine despite testing negative for Ebola, becoming the first person to be quarantined under the state's new policy of quarantining returning health workers from Africa. She was initially put in seclusion in a tent before being transferred to her apartment in Maine on Monday. The nurse has vowed to seek legal action if the quarantine is not lifted. "I truly believe this policy is not scientifically nor constitutionally just, and so I am not going to sit around and be bullied around by politicians and be forced to stay in my home when I am not a risk to the American public," Ms. Hickox said in a television interview. "If the restrictions placed on me by the state of Maine are not lifted by Thursday morning, I will go to court to fight for my freedom," she said. Maine Governor Paul LePage has plans to seek a court order to reinforce isolation for Ms. Hickox till November 10. "While we certainly respect the rights of one individual, we must be vigilant in protecting 1.3 million Mainers, as well as anyone who visits our great state," he stated. Speaking to the media outside her home Wednesday, Ms. Hickox reiterated that she was in good condition and asymptomatic. In addition, she had been checking her temperature twice a day. Maine health commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday that it was incomprehensible why the 21 day quarantine measure was challenged. "We have been pleading for common sense," the health commissioner stated. She also pointed out that Maine's law allows for quarantine "in the event of an actual or threatened epidemic or public health threat." Talks with Ms. Hickox's lawyers by health officials for a possible solution to the scenario ended in a stalemate yesterday. According to CNN, one of Ms. Hickox's lawyers, Norman Siegel, said that "The government can't take away your liberty unless there's some compelling basis for it," and "It doesn't exist here."
Ebola containment has sparked a legal battle in Maine as nurse Kaci Hickox has refused to complete the 21 day quarantine period required by the state for health care workers returning from areas stricken by the epidemic. Ms. Hickox insists that she is not a risk to the public and that she is the target of political bullies. New Jersey and New York have similar restrictions in place, in spite of official criticism from the White House that the health professionals deserve hero status and should receive respect, dignity and support rather than the aggravation of quarantines and travel bans. Maine officials hold firm on their determination to enforce the quarantine, sending police to watch the house and seeking a court order to enforce the quarantine. Hickox has issued the state a deadline of Thursday morning to lift the quarantine or she will take legal action against them to regain her freedom. Ms. Hickox was working with Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone, where the ebola epidemic is particular severe. She arrived back in the U.S. through the airport at Newark, New Jersey last Friday, where screeners determined that she was running a temperature and sent her to nearby University Hospital for further testing. She has been tested twice for ebola since returning home and came away with a clean bill of health. She maintains that she is not contagious while free of symptoms so poses no public health risk. New Jersey medical staff pronounced her ebola free and let her travel home to Fort Kent, Maine where the governor sparked a legal battle by ordering her to voluntarily self quarantine for the 21 day incubation period with active monitoring for symptoms. She maintains that the fever reading at the airport was in error and she has been symptom free since returning home and cannot spread the virus. Her lawyer, Norm Siegel, argues that restrictions have their roots in myth and fear, not good science and medicine. He reminds the public that the government must have a compelling reason to deprive someone of liberty and in this case, no such reason exists. Therefore, forcing compliance with the quarantine restrictions is both illegal and unconstitutional. Both Ms. Hickox and Siegel have stated that she will self monitor for ebola symptoms as she has already been doing, in accordance with the Centers for Disease Control guidelines for monitoring, but will officially oppose any court order that restricts her freedom of movement in her community. Maine Health Commissioner, Mary Mayhew stated that anyone with a credible risk of incipient ebola infection is expected to voluntarily quarantine for the 21 day incubation period to be sure any risk of contagion has passed. Those that refuse will be served a court order requiring compliance. Hickox questions the reliability of the instruments the airport screeners used, as the hospital found no fever even though she took no fever reducing medications in the intervening time. Hickox states that Maine's mandatory quarantine policies for medical humanitarian aid personnel only adds to an unscientific stigma with no evidence to support the practice. Steven Hyman, another member of her legal team, explains that Hickox's last contact with an ebola patient was on Oct. 21, 2014. He supports her insistence that there is no medical basis for quarantining her at this time since none of the medical tests have shown an incipient infection or disease. Although public opinion on her social media seems to spark in the direction of encouraging her to take the extra precaution for safety's sake, she does not understand the concern as she states that facts, science and history are on her side in supporting the efficacy of self monitoring as a "humane, understandable and prudent solution," and preferable to mandatory quarantines. The battle between Hickox and the state is just heating up as she and her lawyers have been in negotiations with state officials on Wednesday and she is prepared to go to court if necessary to obtain her freedom. She is worried that allowing the mandatory quarantine policies to stand will discourage other health professionals from volunteering for the medical aid missions so desperately needed in the ebola stricken Third World countries struggling under the weight of the devastating epidemic.
Nurse Kaci Hickox took off on a bike ride Thursday morning with her boyfriend, defying the quarantine officials have vowed to enforce through legal action. "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based," Hickox said from the front steps of her house on Wednesday night, describing how she'd spent the entire day trying to negotiate with her home state of Maine over what she feels is a medically unnecessary and politically motivated quarantine. RELATED Obama on Ebola 'We can't hermetically seal ourselves off' Since arriving in the U.S. from Sierra Leone on Friday, Hickox has become the face of the mandatory quarantine policies enacted by some states. After a month fighting Ebola in the West African country, she flew into and was first quarantined in New Jersey before being transported to Maine, where officials say they'll file legal action to keep her home for 21 days, the longest incubation period known of for Ebola. "I'm sticking to the science and away from the politics," she said when asked to respond to the two Republican governors, Maine's Paul LePage and New Jersey's Chris Christie, who have forced a quarantine on her. Some argue the move is politically motivated since LePage is up for reelection next week and Christie is widely expected to pursue a presidential bid in 2016. "I completely understand that the state's purpose is to protect the state of Maine," she said. "But we have to make decisions based on science, and I am completely healthy. You could hug me. You could shake my hand. There is no way I could give you Ebola." Health officials say that forcing health aid workers to quarantine themselves for three weeks after returning home disincentivizes them from volunteering where they are most needed. Hickox said she is protesting her mandatory quarantine because she fears what will happen to other aid workers returning from Ebola ravaged countries. "I am fighting for something much more than myself," she said. "It scares me to think of how they're going to be treated and how they're going to feel." Forced quarantine is stigmatizing, she said, and it is "painful" and "emotionally draining" to be told she cannot hug her friends if they visit her. Aid agencies told NBC News that 47 volunteers have returned from Ebola hot zones without developing symptoms and just more than a hundred Americans are currently fighting the disease there. One Doctors Without Borders physician, Dr. Craig Spencer, was recently diagnosed with the disease in New York City. That development has turned Americans' attentions and fears onto aid workers. RELATED Nurse Kaci Hickox 'I will go to court to fight for my freedom' Hickox said she was working with officials who were directly monitoring her health. They have come to her house once and called her a second time. She offered to refrain from taking public transportation and to stay within the city limits, but that officials had rejected those offers, preferring that Hickox remain under quarantine.
Kaci Hickox, the nurse who returned from Sierra Leone with a low grade fever and was quarantined first by New Jersey and currently Maine, this morning defied the 21 day quarantine mandate and left her home on a bicycle. Hickox claims that her civil rights are being violated by Maine and plans to challenge the quarantine in court. "I remain appalled by these home quarantine policies that have been forced upon me, even though I am in perfectly good health and feeling strong and have been this entire time completely symptom free," Hickox said on NBC's Today. When Hickox returned to the U.S., she exhibited a slight fever and was quarantined in New Jersey, which, along with several other states, has instituted a strict 21 day quarantine policy for any person returning from Ebola stricken nations showing symptoms of illness. "I understand that she didn't want to be there, she made that very clear from the beginning," said New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie at the time of the initial quarantine. "But my obligation is to all of the people of New Jersey, and we're just going to continue to do that." Hickox objected, threatened to sue the state, and was permitted to leave New Jersey after the initial fever subsided and no other symptoms emerged. Maine, however, planned to hold Hickox to the remainder of the initial 21 day quarantine and has asked for a court order to enforce the isolation. "While we certainly respect the rights of one individual, we must be vigilant in protecting 1.3 million Mainers, as well as anyone who visits our great state," said Maine Gov. Paul LePage. Ebola is considered contagious only when symptoms emerge. The question is whether it is best to quarantine based on risk prior to becoming symptomatic or wait for illness, which may endanger other people. "I understand how fear spreads," Hickox told the New York Times. "But if I'm a nurse and I have a patient in the hospital, it's our responsibility as medical professionals to advocate for our patients. Now, it's the medical professionals who are being stigmatized. Even if there is popular public opinion, we still have to advocate for what's right." Another concern is the longer term effect of quarantine policies on humanitarian missions. "We are hopeful that the selfless health workers who are brave and caring enough to care for Ebola patients in a foreign country will be willing to take reasonable steps to protect the residents of their own country," said Mary Mayhew, Maine's Health and Human Services commissioner. "However, we will pursue legal authority, if necessary, to ensure risk is minimized for all Mainers."
The 33 year old nurse emerged from her Fort Kent home Wednesday evening as police, given a directive to arrest her if she broke a quarantine order, could only watch. The volunteer who spent time treating Ebola victims in Sierra Leone has vowed to fight a 21 day order that would keep her cooped up until Nov. 10. She's so Ebola free, she'll shake your hand. Defiant nurse Kaci Hickox walked outside her Maine home Wednesday, boyfriend at her side, as she greeted reporters and again made her case that she's symptom free and undeserving of a 21 day quarantine. She shook the hand of one reporter to show just how confident she was, as police watched from across the street in the town of Fort Kent along the Canadian border. "You could hug me. You could shake my hand. I would not give you Ebola," Hickox told reporters Wednesday, the Portland Press Herald reported. Ordered to stay inside until Nov. 10, Hickox vowed to take the issue to court if the quarantine were not lifted by Thursday morning. She's been in isolation since she flew in Friday to Newark Liberty Airport and was pulled aside after a forehead temperature scanner showed she was feverish. "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based," she said. "I'm fighting for something much more than myself. There are so many aid workers coming back and it scares me to think of how they are going to be treated, how they are going to feel." Hickox was just returning from a four week stint working with Ebola patients as a volunteer with Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone. Friday was the day Gov. Chris Christie ordered a mandatory 21 day quarantine for healthcare workers returning from treating Ebola patients in West Africa, and Hickox was the first snared in the program, setting off a heated debate about proper quarantine protocols. She left University Hospital in Newark on Monday after testing negative for the disease and proving asymptomatic. "There's a lot of misinformation about how Ebola is transmitted, and I can understand why people are frightened," the nurse's lawyer, Norman Siegel, said. "But their fear is not based on medical facts." Her home state of Maine has instituted a similar quarantine order and threatened Hickox with arrest if she breaks the protocol. Police could only stand by Wednesday as she stepped outside because a judge had not signed a court order for her arrest. "We hoped that the health care worker would voluntarily comply with these protocols, but this individual has stated publicly she will not," Maine Gov. Paul LePage said in a statement. But Hickox has her supporters, beginning with her boyfriend, Theodore Wilbur. He's vowed to stay with her and off the University of Maine campus in Fort Kent, where he's a nursing student, for 21 days. Doctors Without Borders stood by its volunteer, saying it supported the nurse's "right as a private citizen to challenge excessive restrictions being placed upon her." "Such a measure is not based upon established medical science," the organization said. And Ashoka Mukpo, a freelance cameraman who contracted Ebola while working with NBC in Liberia, lauded Hickox for standing up to the restrictions as he told CNN he feared the protocols were working to "shame" selfless aid workers. "She's earned the right to have a sense of her own safety and her own risk factor to others," he told CNN.. "My feeling is ... Gov. Christie is playing politics right now. It seems to me it's an effort to work with public opinion rather than listen to the advice of the experts and i just think it's counterproductive." Hickox, for her part, has promised to return to Sierra Leone and volunteer again, despite the quagmire she's found herself in. ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE FOR VIDEO With News Wire Services sgoldstein nydailynews.com Related Stories Faust Kaci Hickox is right to contest her quarantine Siegel Why I favor the 21 day quarantine of workers exposed Nurse Kaci Hickox vows to break Ebola Maine quarantine Lupica NJ Gov. Chris Christie's quarantine decisions are full of baloney SC family talk life under self quarantine NJ nurse who was confined over Ebola, boyfriend now hiding New England Journal of Medicine blasts N.Y., N.J. Ebola quarantines
Kaci Hickox, the Doctors Without Broders nurse who became the first person impacted by the quarantine imposed by New York and New Jersey last week and who was held at a hospital in Newark before being allowed to go home, is threatening to sue Maine health authorities if they continue to enforce a mandatory quarantine order against her The nurse who was quarantined after returning from treating Ebola patients in West Africa has given the State of Maine until Thursday to let her move freely, setting up what could be a test case of whether state quarantines are legal. The nurse, Kaci Hickox, 33, who was confined first by New Jersey when she came back to the United States and then by Maine, did a blitz on morning television challenging her confinement by Maine officials. "I remain really concerned by these mandatory quarantine policies," Ms. Hickox told ABC News via Skype from Maine on Wednesday morning. "I think we are only adding to stigmatization that again is not based on science or evidence." If the state does not lift her quarantine order by Thursday morning, she said, "I will go to court to attain my freedom." On the "Today" show on NBC, Ms. Hickox said, "I am not going to sit around and be bullied by politicians and forced to stay in my home when I am not a risk to the American public." aine's governor, Paul R. LePage, said Wednesday that he was working with state health officials "to seek legal authority to enforce the quarantine." "We hoped that the health care worker would voluntarily comply with these protocols, but this individual has stated publicly she will not abide by the protocols," Mr. LePage said in a statement. "We are very concerned about her safety and health and that of the community. We are exploring all of our options for protecting the health and well being of the health care worker, anyone who comes in contact with her." State law gives the governor authority to confine individuals if there is "an actual or threatened epidemic or public health threat." In 2007, Maine used the law to confine a homeless man who had drug resistant tuberculosis, according to state health reports. The governor has posted the Maine State Police outside the residence in Fort Kent where Ms. Hickox is staying, his statement said, "for both her protection and the health of the community." Officials at the federal Centers for Disease Control have criticized mandatory quarantines, saying self monitoring for symptoms is sufficient. Ms. Hickox said she had been monitoring her health by taking her temperature twice a day. In a statement Wednesday, the organization with which Ms. Hickox worked in West Africa, Doctors without Borders, said it "strongly disagrees with blanket forced quarantine for health care workers returning from Ebola affected countries." It said, "Such a measure is not based upon established medical science." One of Ms. Hickox's lawyers, Steve Hyman, told ABC News he did not believe the state had legal authority to confine his client. "The standard is," he said, "does Kaci have an infection disease or agent? Does she harbor an infection? The answer is no." He said "There is no medical science that says she should be quarantined. None." Norman Siegel, a prominent civil rights lawyer who also representing Ms. Hickox, said on the "Today" show that they would take legal action if Maine officials went to court to enforce a quarantine. He said the state had no justification to do so. Once the quarantine policy was announced in the wake of the discovery that a New York City doctor who had been in the Ebola hot zone had come down with the disease, and had traveled in parts of the city before he had any symptoms that would be considered warning signs of the illness, it was perhaps inevitable that there would be a legal clash between state and local authorities and a person impacted by a mandatory quarantine order. And given that she has been outspoken about her confinement from the beginning, it's not surprising that Hickcox would be taking this position. However, while the law in this area is unclear, it strikes me that any lawsuit she files is likely to fail for reasons that may not have much with what the law is or should be. As I said yesterday, the entire issue of what the state can do in response to the outbreak of a serious communicable disease, when and under what circumstances it can do anything, and whom it can act against. As I said, even though most of the law in this area is quite old and tends to pre date recent developments in area like due process, it seems fairly clear that a Court would have no problem with a quarantine imposed against someone who is obviously contagious with a disease like Ebola. Things could be quite different, though, in the case of someone like Ms. Hickox who is not displaying any symptoms at all to date and is therefore not contagious according to all available medical science. Yes, it's true that she could develop symptoms at any point in time, Dr. Craig Spencer for example was apparently okay up until his first registered a fever of 100.3 last Thursday afternoon, but it's equally possible that she won't develop any symptoms at all and it isn't clear to me that, even under the most generous interpretation of the police power laws that allow for quarantines, such a person could or should be forced to quarantine themselves for any period of time. Not surprisingly, there seems to be something of a negative reaction developing against Ms. Hickcox, especially among conservatives who are displaying an interesting level of trust in state authority, and disdain for personal liberty given their rhetoric on these topics over the years. Even beyond partisans, though, a new poll from from CBS News shows massive support for the type of quarantine that she is vowing to resist, so I'd suspect that most of the respondents who are okay with quarantines would be inclined to have a negative opinion of someone who says she doesn't intend to abide by one. It's also quite possible that, regardless of what the law is or, perhaps in this case its better to say ought to be since I'm not sure we've seen a case where the state is seeking to quarantine someone not because they are contagious but because there's a chance they might become contagious in the future, that even a Federal District Court Judge might be disinclined to rule against the state on this issue. This is especially true given the fact that, by Friday, there will only be fourteen days left in the twenty one day incubation period since Ms. Hickox arrived in the United States. That number is likely even lower since the proper day to begin measuring from would be the day she left west Africa. Given the limited nature of the time period during which she'd be confined at home, and indeed the fact that it would be at home rather than in a hospital or some other facility, a Judge could find that the state's request is reasonable under the circumstances and allow the quarantine to continue. Assuming that she shows no symptoms and the quarantine is lifted, then any appeal of the Judge's order would be moot so there really wouldn't be any binding precedent set. If she continues to be subjected to quarantine after twenty one days, obviously, the facts of the case would change significantly and a Court would likely rule in her favor. Under the facts presented, though, I'm inclined to think that a lawsuit against Maine health authorities over this issue would probably end up being a losing case for Hickcox, even though I think that legally, scientifically, and morally she is far more in the right than the government would be in such a case.
Kaci Hickox, who recently treated Ebola patients in West Africa, told reporters late Wednesday that day long negotiations had failed to resolve a deadlock over the state's instructions. The 33 year old nurse, who earlier vowed to ignore the state order beginning Thursday, and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, stepped off the front porch of his house and rode off on bicycles, followed by state police. Hickox appeared to test at least the spirit of the state order Wednesday night by stepping off the front porch of her boyfriend's home to speak to the media and shake hands with one reporter. "It is not my intention to put anyone at risk in this community," she said. "We have been negotiating with the state of Maine all day and tried to resolve this amicably, but they will not allow me to leave my house and have any interaction with the public even though I am completely healthy and symptom free." Hickox, a nurse with Doctors Without Borders, arrived in Maine on Monday after being forcibly held in an isolation tent in New Jersey for three days under that state's strict new law for health care workers who have recently treated Ebola patients in West Africa. Hickox was the first person pulled aside at Newark Liberty International Airport on Friday under new state regulations after her return from Sierra Leone, one of the West African countries hardest hit by an deadly Ebola outbreak. She has not displayed symptoms of Ebola and was allowed to leave New Jersey Monday, traveling by private car to her boyfriend's home in Fort Kent, a rural town near the Canadian border. "We have to make decisions on science and I am completely healthy," she said, standing next to her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur. "You could hug me, you could shake my hand. There is no way I would give you Ebola." Maine health officials, who have instructed her to remain at the house for 21 days, say they don't have the authority yet to prevent her from leaving her home until a judge signs off on a court order. Gov. Paul LePage said Wednesday that he was seeking that legal authority. For now, Department of Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew says police who sent two vehicles to the house on Wednesday will monitor the nurse if she leaves her house. Hickox shied away from commenting on LePage's involvement, saying she is "sticking to the science and away from the politics." "I didn't sign up for this," she said. " I flew into Newark airport on the wrong day. This has all been a little overwhelming to me. I think I am fighting for something much more than myself." Hickox said two dozen American health workers will be returning from West Africa in the next month and "it scares me how they are going to be treated and how they are going to feel." She said she wanted to fight the kind of "stigmatization" once associated with AIDS. She said Wednesday that she had offered a compromise to the state in which she would agree to stay within the Fort Kent area and to travel only by private car, not public transportation. "I'd love to be able to go to the Moose Shack in Fort Kent and get an amazing slice of pizza and not be worried about what people are thinking or if I am going to get arrested by state troopers if I walk out of my property," she said. .Northern Maine Medical Center says Hickox had originally agreed to a 21 day quarantine, according to WLBZ TV. NMMC also said Wilbur had also agreed to a self quarantine for 21 days and will be taking UMaine Fort Kent nursing classes online. There is no word on whether he would abide by quarantine for the full period. Hickox, according to her attorney, had only agreed to remain home for two days after arriving from New Jersey.
00 00 I am completely healthy given you his. Hug me you 00 03 could shake my hand there is no way I would give 00 07 you pull out. With her boyfriend at her side nurse Casey 00 12 hit Cox emerged from her home Wednesday night to speak to 00 15 reporters about her fight with the state of. Maine we have 00 18 been in negotiations. All day with the state of Maine. And 00 22 try to resolve this amicably. But they will not allow me 00 26 to leave my house than at any interaction with the public. 00 30 Even though I am completely healthy and that is very. Hancock 00 33 a Doctors Without Borders nurse who recently returned from Sierra Leone. 00 37 Says she's been informed that Maine's attorney general plans to take 00 40 legal action so they can forced her to stay in her 00 43 home for 21 day quarantine. In the meantime police are stationed 00 47 outside her home in an unmarked car. They're monitoring her movement 00 51 and watched as she spoke to reporters. I don't wants to 00 54 hurt anyone in the public. But I don't think this is 00 57 an acceptable lines. State health care officials disagree staying at home 01 02 for the duration of this 21 day period is not seen. 01 07 Like a burden some request to ask in order to provide 01 13 out of an abundance of caution. A protection to her and 01 17 to the individuals at this state. Cox said she thinks there 01 20 are some middle ground that can be agreed upon. Like travel 01 23 restrictions and what she called direct active monitoring. You have an 01 27 actual public health worker in your state coming to your house 01 30 went to date with the youth and calling it the second 01 33 time. You're taking two pitchers like today. He talks has come 01 36 under fire not only from politicians and government officials but for 01 40 many in the public. On social media she's been called selfish 01 43 and it disgraced our profession. But Hitchcock says it other than 01 47 her profession that she's fighting for she doesn't want them to 01 50 face similar circumstances when they return from treating people in West 01 53 Africa. It scares me to think how there can be treated 01 56 I'm fighting for something much more in myself. 221 CONNECT 104 TWEETLINKEDIN 22 COMMENTEMAILMORE FORT KENT, Maine An Ebola nurse went bike riding with her boyfriend Thursday morning, defying state orders to remain at home for 21 days. Kaci Hickox, who recently treated Ebola patients in West Africa, told reporters late Wednesday that day long negotiations had failed to resolve a deadlock over the state's instructions. The 33 year old nurse, who earlier vowed to ignore the state order beginning Thursday, and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, donned helmets, stepped off the front porch of his rural house and rode off on bicycles, followed by state police. Without a court order, troops do not have the authority to restrain her. Hickox appeared to test at least the spirit of the state order Wednesday night by stepping off the front porch of her boyfriend's home to speak to the media and shake hands with one reporter. "It is not my intention to put anyone at risk in this community," she said. "We have been negotiating with the state of Maine all day and tried to resolve this amicably, but they will not allow me to leave my house and have any interaction with the public even though I am completely healthy and symptom free." Hickox, a nurse with Doctors Without Borders, arrived in Maine on Monday after being forcibly held in an isolation tent in New Jersey for three days under that state's strict new law for health care workers who have recently treated Ebola patients in West Africa. Hickox was the first person pulled aside at Newark Liberty International Airport on Friday under new state regulations after her return from Sierra Leone, one of the West African countries hardest hit by an deadly Ebola outbreak. She has not displayed symptoms of Ebola and was allowed to leave New Jersey Monday, traveling by private car to her boyfriend's home in Fort Kent, a rural town near the Canadian border. "We have to make decisions on science and I am completely healthy," she said, standing next to her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur. "You could hug me, you could shake my hand. There is no way I would give you Ebola." Maine health officials, who have instructed her to remain at the house for 21 days, say they don't have the authority yet to prevent her from leaving her home until a judge signs off on a court order. Gov. Paul LePage said Wednesday that he was seeking that legal authority. For now, Department of Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew says police who sent two vehicles to the house on Wednesday will monitor the nurse if she leaves her house. Hickox shied away from commenting on LePage's involvement, saying she is "sticking to the science and away from the politics." "I didn't sign up for this," she said. " I flew into Newark airport on the wrong day. This has all been a little overwhelming to me. I think I am fighting for something much more than myself." Hickox said two dozen American health workers will be returning from West Africa in the next month and "it scares me how they are going to be treated and how they are going to feel." She said she wanted to fight the kind of "stigmatization" once associated with AIDS. She said Wednesday that she had offered a compromise to the state in which she would agree to stay within the Fort Kent area and to travel only by private car, not public transportation. "I'd love to be able to go to the Moose Shack in Fort Kent and get an amazing slice of pizza and not be worried about what people are thinking or if I am going to get arrested by state troopers if I walk out of my property," she said. .Northern Maine Medical Center says Hickox had originally agreed to a 21 day quarantine, according to WLBZ TV. NMMC also said Wilbur had also agreed to a self quarantine for 21 days and will be taking UMaine Fort Kent nursing classes online. There is no word on whether he would abide by quarantine for the full period. Hickox, according to her attorney, had only agreed to remain home for two days after arriving from New Jersey. Contributing Associated Press 221 CONNECT 104 TWEETLINKEDIN 22 COMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story http usat.ly 1tFqmHo
She's flown the coop. Nurse Kaci Hickox left her Maine home Thursday morning for a bicycle ride with her boyfriend as police could only watch. "It's a beautiful day for a bike ride," the defiant nurse cheered to assembled reporters as she and Theodore Wilbur wheeled off. Aboard mountain bikes, the two headed for the Fort Kent Heritage Trail as a state trooper followed along in a cruiser. Though threatened with arrest, a court order has yet to be signed so officers cannot detain Hickox, who is supposed to remain in her home through Nov. 10. Her morning flight came after a Wednesday evening appearance, where the 33 year old walked outside her home, boyfriend at her side, and she greeted reporters as she again made her case that she's symptom free and undeserving of a 21 day quarantine. She shook the hand of one reporter to show just how confident she was, as police watched from across the street in the town of Fort Kent along the Canadian border. "You could hug me. You could shake my hand. I would not give you Ebola," Hickox told reporters Wednesday, the Portland Press Herald reported. Hickox vowed to take the issue to court if the quarantine were not lifted by Thursday morning. She's been in isolation since she flew in Friday to Newark Liberty Airport and was pulled aside after a forehead temperature scanner showed she was feverish. "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based," she said. "I'm fighting for something much more than myself. There are so many aid workers coming back and it scares me to think of how they are going to be treated, how they are going to feel." Hickox was just returning from a four week stint working with Ebola patients as a volunteer with Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone. Friday was the day Gov. Chris Christie ordered a mandatory 21 day quarantine for healthcare workers returning from treating Ebola patients in West Africa, and Hickox was the first snared in the program, setting off a heated debate about proper quarantine protocols. She left University Hospital in Newark on Monday and drove home after testing negative for the disease and proving asymptomatic. "There's a lot of misinformation about how Ebola is transmitted, and I can understand why people are frightened," the nurse's lawyer, Norman Siegel, said. "But their fear is not based on medical facts." Her home state of Maine has instituted a similar quarantine order and threatened Hickox with arrest if she breaks the protocol. Police could only stand by Wednesday as she stepped outside because a judge had not signed a court order for her arrest. "We hoped that the health care worker would voluntarily comply with these protocols, but this individual has stated publicly she will not," Maine Gov. Paul LePage said in a statement. But Hickox has her supporters, beginning with her boyfriend, Theodore Wilbur. He's vowed to stay with her and off the University of Maine campus in Fort Kent, where he's a nursing student, for 21 days. Doctors Without Borders stood by its volunteer, saying it supported the nurse's "right as a private citizen to challenge excessive restrictions being placed upon her." "Such a measure is not based upon established medical science," the organization said. And Ashoka Mukpo, a freelance cameraman who contracted Ebola while working with NBC in Liberia, lauded Hickox for standing up to the restrictions as he told CNN he feared the protocols were working to "shame" selfless aid workers. "She's earned the right to have a sense of her own safety and her own risk factor to others," he told CNN.. "My feeling is ... Gov. Christie is playing politics right now. It seems to me it's an effort to work with public opinion rather than listen to the advice of the experts and i just think it's counterproductive." Hickox, for her part, has promised to return to Sierra Leone and volunteer again, despite the quagmire she's found herself in. ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE FOR VIDEO With News Wire Services sgoldstein nydailynews.com Related Stories Jeremy Faust Kaci Hickox is right to contest her quarantine Marc Siegel Why I favor the 21 day quarantine of workers exposed Nurse Kaci Hickox vows to break Ebola Maine quarantine Lupica NJ Gov. Chris Christie's quarantine decisions are full of baloney SC family talk life under self quarantine NJ nurse who was confined over Ebola, boyfriend now hiding New England Journal of Medicine blasts N.Y., N.J. Ebola quarantines
The fight between a Maine nurse under Ebola quarantine orders and authorities intensified on Thursday, as the nurse defied state orders and went for a bike ride with her boyfriend. The nurse, Kaci Hickox, has argued that forced 21 day isolation orders are medically unnecessary and violate her civil rights. She has hired two New York City based attorneys to fight Maine's orders that she stay isolated indoors until 10 November. "We have been in negotiations all day with the state of Maine, and tried to resolve this amicably but they will not allow me to leave my house and have any interaction with the public even though I am completely healthy and symptom free," said Hickox from her front porch in Fort Kent, at a press conference on Wednesday. Armed state troopers have been guarding Hickox's house since Wednesday, standing outside with a huddle of reporters. Maine state police followed Hickox on her bike ride with boyfriend Ted Wilbur to monitor her interaction with the public. The Associated Press reports that Maine state police cannot arrest Hickox, because they have not obtained a court order to do so. The nurse hired attorneys after she was questioned and detained at Newark Liberty Airport in New Jersey on Friday. Airport officials questioned Hickox for three hours before detecting an elevated temperature with a heat scanning gun (which researchers do not consider reliable), and bringing her to a nearby hospital where she was detained. Hickox was forced to stay in an isolation tent at Newark University hospital until Monday, when the governor of New Jersey agreed to her release. The Ebola virus can have an incubation period of up to 21 days before infected persons show symptoms, typically first a fever. Ebola is only contagious when those infected are symptomatic. To combat the disease, with which four people have been diagnosed in the United States, several states have adopted measures over and above what is called for by federal health authorities. Maine, for example, says it will isolate any healthcare worker returning from the Ebola stricken west African countries of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The isolation measures have brought widespread condemnation from the medical establishment and the White House. Aid organizations say the mandatory isolation periods will make it more difficult to recruit volunteers, who typically serve in west Africa for only a few weeks. "We have to keep in mind that if we're discouraging our healthcare workers, who are prepared to make these sacrifices, from traveling to these places in need, then we're not doing our job in terms of looking after our own public health and safety," President Barack Obama said on Wednesday. Doctors Without Borders, an international aid organization that responds to public health crises, commented on Hickox's isolation saying it "strongly disagrees with blanket forced quarantine for healthcare workers returning from Ebola affected countries." The organization added that "such a measure is not based upon established medical science". "Kaci Hickox has carried out important, life saving work for Doctors Without Borders in a number of countries in recent years, and we are proud to have her as a member of our organization. Doctors Without Borders respects Kaci's right as a private citizen to challenge excessive restrictions being placed upon her," the organization said in a press release.
10 38 a.m. The most talked about bike ride since the Tour de France. "We have been in negotiations all day with the state of Maine and tried to resolve this amicably, but they are not allowing me to leave my house and interact with the public even though I am completely healthy and symptom free," Hickox told The Portland Press Herald Wednesday. "I am frustrated by this fact, and I have been told that it is the attorney general's intention to file legal action against me. And if this does occur, I will challenge the legal actions." Kaci Hickox left her home this morning in defiance of Maine's voluntary quarantine for health workers who treated Ebola patients. Hickox and her boyfriend rode away from their home on bicycles Thursday morning, followed by state police who were monitoring Hickox's movements, according to an Associated Press report. Troopers can't take her into custody without a judge's permission, according to the report. Hickox, who treated Ebola patients in Africa with the group Doctors Without Borders, was the first person forced into New Jersey's mandatory quarantine for people returning from three West African countries. Maine state law allows a judge to grant temporary custody of someone if health officials demonstrate ''a clear and immediate public health threat,'' the AP reported. Countries currently affected by Ebola Mali, Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Spain, and the United States of America. Countries where the outbreak has ended Nigeria (Oct. 19), Senegal (Oct. 17) The likelihood of contracting Ebola in Massachusetts remains very low, according to the state's public health officials. You have to be in direct contact with an infected person's bodily fluids while they are contagious (displaying symptoms of Ebola). Even if someone has been exposed, symptoms may appear in as little as two days, and in as many as 21 days, after exposure. The CDC says the average is 8 to 10 days.
By Martin Gould In Fort Kent, Maine and Louise Boyle for MailOnline Nurse Kaci Hickox defied Maine's mandatory Ebola quarantine on Thursday and headed out for a bike ride with her boyfriend. The 33 year old nurse left her home in Fort Kent, Maine with partner Ted Wilbur this morning, wearing gloves, a safety helmet and couple of layers of fleece to combat the bitter cold and rain. Miss Hickox broke her quarantine at 9am and took an ATV trail behind her home for the hour long ride. A state trooper who had been stationed outside the house followed her in a police cruiser. 'It's just good to be out,' Miss Hickox told MailOnline as she left. Police were monitoring her movements and public interactions but couldn't detain her without a court order signed by a judge. As she returned home, she said 'There is no court action against me. There is nothing to stop me from going for a bike ride in my home town.' Hickox said that she had not spoken to her lawyers about the ride and it was her decision to go out and get exercise after a day of being cooped up in her house. The state trooper who followed them by car said he was just monitoring Miss Hickox's actions and had no intention of arresting her. The nurse did not say whether she would venture outside again on Thursday, adding that she had to return home to prepare for her daily temperature check for Ebola symptoms from the state's Center for Disease Control. On Wednesday night Miss Hickox also left the home she has been ordered to stay inside for 21 days in order to speak with the press about her 'frustrating' situation. Standing in front of her boyfriend's house, as the police tasked with watching her looked on from across the street, Miss Hickox told the waiting media contingent that she will continue to fight her quarantine orders, even if she is charged for breaking them. 'We have been in negotiations all day with the state of Maine and tried to resolve this amicably, but they are not allowing me to leave my house and interact with the public even though I am completely healthy and symptom free,' Miss Hickox said, according to The Press Herald. 'I am frustrated by this fact, and I have been told that it is the Attorney General's intention to file legal action against me. And if this does occur, I will challenge the legal actions.' Hickox shook the hand of MailOnline's reporter at the scene and said 'You could hug me. You could shake my hand. I would not give you Ebola'. The Doctors Without Borders nurse believes she flew into New Jersey from treating dying Ebola patients in West Africa on 'the wrong day'. She claimed that many other aid workers have entered the country and continue to do so without having to go through what she had. Hickox said she remains healthy and has not shown any Ebola symptoms and that the measures she's being forced to comply with are over the top. However residents of the tiny Maine town where is staying have said that '21 days (of quarantine) is better is better than 21 deaths' and that it is a necessary precaution. 'I'm upset that Chris Christie ever let her go from New Jersey,' said resident Anne Dugal. 'He should have kept her there longer. 'She says she only had a temperature of 101 because she got upset. No one shows a temperature because they're upset. She should stay inside.' Ted WIlbur, Miss Hickox's boyfriend, had walked over to the police parked across the street from their house on Wednesday to check Hickox would not be arrested for leaving the house. She did not go any further than the driveway and police remained across the street for the press conference. Attacks on Hickox have come thick and fast after she told both NBC's 'Today' show and ABC's 'Good Morning America' that she planned to stay in her home on the outskirts of Fort Kent only for one day after being driven back from New Jersey. Maine Governor Paul LePage stationed state troopers outside the house that Hickox, 33, shares with her boyfriend Ted Wilbur, setting the stage for a showdown should she decide to leave. The governor's office did not say whether the nurse would be arrested if she tried to leave, but said state police were stationed outside the home 'for both her protection and the health of the community.' It is unclear whether the troopers would have the legal authority to arrest Hickox if she decided to leave, because the state's guidelines are voluntary. But LePage wants to make it mandatory and enforceable with a court order. State Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew told reporters in the capital Augusta When it is made clear by an individual in this risk category that they do not intend to voluntarily stay at home for the remaining 21 days, we will immediately seek a court order.' According to NBC the hearing is not likely to be held until Monday the day before LePage faces re election and four days after Hickox has vowed to leave her home. 'If I saw her in the street I wouldn't go near her,' said Dugal. 'Twenty one days is not that long a time.' Novelist Cathie Pelletier, sitting at the next table to Dugal, agreed. 'It's not a case that she can say sorry if she is wrong and dozens of people get infected,' she said. 'I can't understand why she can't just stay at home those extra few days.' But both the town's chief of police, Tom Pelletier Cathie's third cousin and Dr. Michael Sullivan, the chief medical officer at Fort Kent's hospital the Northern Maine Medical Center, said they wanted to shake Hickox's hand and thank her for the work she has been doing helping the sick. The conflicting views go to the heart of the confusion surrounding the approach taken by the federal government, the CDC, and individual states to the Ebola crisis and quarantine rules. They came as many took to Facebook to slam Hickox for refusing to lock herself away for three weeks and at the medical center where panicked patients are canceling appointments even though Hickox has gone nowhere near it, the hospital's boss said. Hickox and Wilbur returned to their three bedroom home on the outskirts of Fort Kent under cover of darkness on Tuesday night after a stopover at his uncle's house in Freeport, Maine. They had driven nearly 500 miles from Newark, N.J. where she had been held in quarantine following her arrival in the United States from Africa. Hickox, 33, had been treating Ebola sufferers in Sierra Leone with the medical charity Doctors Without Borders. She has shown no signs of the disease but a forehead thermometer showed she had a slight temperature when she arrived at Newark Liberty International airport, which she has put down to being flustered or a faulty thermometer. Christie departed from national policy and had tried to confine her to a tent inside a hospital for 21 days. But after she threatened legal action and the White House intervened, she was allowed to travel on the understanding that she would put herself in voluntary isolation in accordance with Maine state guidelines. But Hickox has since declared that she will not be bullied by 'appalling' confinement rules and plans to fight for her freedom if restrictions are not lifted by Maine officials on Thursday. Hickox has said she would abide by all the self monitoring requirements of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. This does not stop people from traveling outside their home, but instead advises them not to go to large gatherings. It also calls on them to take a series of tests twice a day to monitor whether they are developing symptoms. Doctors insist that the virus is not contagious until symptoms develop. On Wednesday morning, Hickox, 33, told Today 'I don't plan on sticking to the (Maine's) guidelines. I am not going to sit around and be bullied by politicians and forced to stay in my home when I am not a risk to the American public.' Pelletier, who has been chief since May after retiring as a sergeant from the Maine State Police said he has absolutely no reservations about speaking face to face with Hickox. 'She just had the misfortune of landing at the wrong airport' he said. 'If Gov. Christie had a plan in place on legal grounds, I guess he would have followed through on it, but he allowed her to leave, which must have meant that he felt safe, and she returned here.' But LePage said 'While we certainly respect the rights of one individual, we must be vigilant in protecting 1.3 million Mainers, as well as anyone who visits our great state.' Hickox's home is just a mile from the Canadian border and three miles out of the center of Fort Kent, a town known for an annual dogsledding race and home to a training center for the Winter Olympic sport of biathlon. Meanwhile, Peter Sirois, chief executive officer of the Northern Maine Medical Center, said more than 10 procedures had so far been put off at the local hospital. 'People are canceling X rays and other elective procedures,' said Sirois. 'Those cancelations are totally inappropriate because Kaci Hickox was never here and even if she had been, the public would be perfectly safe.' The furor came after President Obama appeared to condemn Governor Christie in a speech on Tuesday on the lawn of the White House. And then today the president appeared with healthcare workers who were still in the 21 day risk period at the White House and hit out at critics who were 'hiding under the covers' rather than backing those brave enough to travel to Africa and fight the raging epidemic there. His words have so far done little to reassure the public. A Kaci Hickox Supporters site has been swamped with messages attacking her despite a warning that any negative statements would be met with a ban from the site. Candie Archambeau wrote 'You are a nurse! Don't you take some sort of oath? Shame on you for being so selfish! Block me, i could care less! Hope you are proud of yourself and feel accomplished when someone dies because of you and your ignorance!!!!!!' And Andrew Roach added 'She is not a hero she is a idiot who only cares for herself. She is a disgrace to every medical professional!' Hickox was further attacked on her own Facebook community page for the interviews she gave Wednesday to Good Morning America and Today and the piece she wrote for the Dallas Morning News in which she threatened to sue for freedom from quarantine. Jackie Fowler wrote 'Sorry Nurse Hickox I too am a nurse, and while I applaud your decisions to care for those less fortunate in other lands, I cannot stand by your decision to write egregious op ed pieces and file suits. 'In my mother's era, people suspected to have measles, scarlet fever, and polio were quarantined and no one thought negatively about it. Your behaviours put more negative light on nursing, which has borne the burden of negativity for years. Shame on you.' Another Facbook page, Mainers against Kaci Hickox returning home to Fort Kent Maine, was also filled with hate. 'WE have the right to KEEP HER IN LOCKDOWN until she is safe from infecting US,' wrote Moe Bundy. And Laurie Lee added ' She volunteered to go to a filthy, dirty, disease ridden country and she thinks a tent in NJ is a cruel punishment? Something wrong with this, something wrong with her too. 'If she gets sick in the next couple of weeks she will find herself to be the most hated woman in America, no matter how much good she did for a bunch of strangers in a strange land, she'll wish she'd stayed in the tent.' Meanwhile, Hickox insisted today that her elevated temperature of 101F which is considered an Ebola symptom was caused by a faulty thermometer and the chaos at Newark last Friday. She said 'This whole time I have been symptom free. I believe the forehead scanner was inaccurate. My temperature was normal when taken by oral thermometer.' She said that she understood the Ebola fears among the public, but added 'The issue at Newark Airport is different I saw complete disorganization, no leadership and if you're going to put a policy like that in place that impedes on my civil rights, you need to have it worked out before you start detaining me in an airport.' Miss Hickox appeared on the Today show via Skype today where she told host Matt Lauer that she was appalled by mandatory quarantine policies, adding 'They are not based on science or evidence. 'If the restrictions by Maine are not lifted by Thursday morning, I will go to court to get my freedom.' Her lawyer, civil rights attorney Norman Siegel, told Today that there was absolutely no basis in medical science to quarantine his client at this time. The 33 year old nurse believes authorities should follow the reasonable steps of an organization like Doctors Without Borders who recommend 'self monitoring twice a day and if you develop symptoms then you need to be tested'. Miss Hickox said 'I truly believe that this policy is not scientifically or constitutionally just. I am not a risk to the American public. Of course I do understand that it has created a lot of fear but we have to make policies based on evidence. She added 'We need more education about the disease and should not be taking these mixes messages from politicians. Currently, I am the one that's suffering.' The nurse plans to return to West Africa in the future to help in the fight against Ebola. Northern Maine Medical Center chief nursing officer Alain Bois told reporters that should Hickox develop symptoms she would be isolated in a special quarantine area at the 49 bed hospital before being transferred to Bangor, a three hour drive away. He insisted that unlike the quarantine area that Christie kept her in in New Jersey it had a proper flush toilet and a shower. Dr. Sullivan, who praised Hickox for her dedication to helping the sick added 'I understand people's concern. It is a scary disease and I understand it is the governor's job to reassure the public that he is doing what is necessary to protect the public. 'It is difficult to balance that with scientific evidence especially as things are changing such as the level of protection for medical staff.
A nurse who returned from fighting Ebola in West Africa challenged demands that she remain quarantined by leaving her home this morning for a bike ride with her boyfriend. Kaci Hickox, 33, went on the bike ride in Fort Kent, Maine, after vowing last night she wasn't willing to "stand here and have my civil rights violated." While Hickox was pedaling, attorneys for the state of Maine went to Superior Court seeking a judge's permission to give Hickox a blood test for Ebola, Maine Gov. Paul LePage told ABC News. "This could be resolved today," LePage said. "She has been exposed and she's not cooperative, so force her to take a test. It's so simple." Medical experts have said that an Ebola test would only be positive if someone were symptomatic. The governor said he has a state police car stationed outside Hickox's home and that she has the town "scared to death." The nurse, who had been treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone for Doctors Without Borders, said she was fighting for her rights as well as other health care workers who will be returning from the Ebola hot zone in West Africa. She said that Doctors Without Border told her another 20 health care workers will be coming home in the next month. "Most aid workers who come home just want to see their family and have a sort of normal life," she told reporters Wednesday night. "I'm fighting for something other than myself. There are aid workers coming back every day." Hickox said she isn't committed to a quarantine that isn't "scientifically valid," she told reporters standing alongside her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, outside her home Wednesday night. The quarantine demand goes beyond guidelines put out by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which indicate that she can't spread Ebola if she isn't sick, doesn't have symptoms and no one is in close contact with her bodily fluids. "You could hug me, you could shake my hand and I would not give you Ebola," she said. HIckox returned to the United States on Oct. 24, landing in Newark Liberty International Airport in New Jersey, where she was questioned and quarantined in an outdoor tent through the weekend despite having no symptoms of the lethal virus. Hickox registered a fever on an infrared thermometer at the airport, but an oral thermometer at University Hospital in Newark showed that she had no fever, she said. After twice testing negative for the Ebola, Hickox was released and returned home to Maine on Oct. 27. Maine's health commissioner announced that Maine would join the handful of states going beyond federal guidelines and asking that returning Ebola health workers be self quarantined for 21 days. But Hickox vowed to break the quarantine because it wasn't based on science. "I will go to court to attain my freedom," Hickox told "Good Morning America" Wednesday via Skype from her hometown of Fort Kent. "I have been completely asymptomatic since I've been here. I feel absolutely great." The CDC doesn't consider health workers who treated Ebola patients in West Africa to be at "high risk" for catching Ebola if they were wearing protective gear, according to new guidelines announced this week. Since they have "some risk," the CDC recommends that they undergo monitoring tracking symptoms and body temperature twice a day avoid public transportation and take other precautions. But the CDC doesn't require home quarantines for these workers. Someone isn't contagious until Ebola symptoms appear, according to the CDC. And even then, transmission requires contact with bodily fluids such as blood and vomit. Get real time updates as this story unfolds. To start, just "star" this story in ABC News' phone app. Download ABC News for iPhone here or ABC News for Android here. To be notified about our live weekend digital reports, tap here.
Ebola medic Kaci Hickox remains defiant, even as Maine Governor Paule LePage (R) plans to seek legal authority to keep the nurse isolated at home until the incubation period for Ebola has passed. (Reuters) The nurse who has been (technically) quarantined in Maine because she treated Ebola patients went for a leisurely bike ride Thursday morning, following through on her vow to ignore the voluntary quarantine order. Trailed by a coterie of reporters documenting her trip on a crisp Maine morning, she enjoyed an hour long ride along with her boyfriend Kaci Hickox, who was initially quarantined in New Jersey upon returning to the United States from West Africa, had been inside her Maine home since being released from New Jersey on Monday. A state trooper had been stationed out front of her home, according to her attorney. When she arrived in Maine, the state government said it planned to have her quarantined in her home until the window for possible infection had passed. It generally takes up to 21 days for a person who contracts Ebola to become symptomatic, and a person with Ebola can only be contagious when they are symptomatic Hickox, who has been back in the United States for nearly a week, said she has not had a fever or any other symptoms so far. Hickox wasn't so interested in being quarantined again, though. "I don't plan on sticking to the guidelines," she told the Today Show on Wednesday. "I remain appalled by these home quarantine policies that have been forced upon me, even though I am in perfectly good health and feeling strong and have been this entire time completely symptom free." Maine Gov. Paul LePage (R) said Wednesday that since Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols," the state was exploring its options for how to get legal authority a court order, in other words to enforce the quarantine, which has been voluntary thus far. If Maine seeks a court order to enforce the quarantine, Hickox intends to challenge it, her attorney told The Post. Hickox has become the central figure in an ongoing debate over how the government will deal with health care workers who return to the United States after working in the Ebola ravaged part of West Africa. Her quarantine in New Jersey began the same day that state and New York announced mandatory quarantines for returning health care workers, a measure that went beyond what had been recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and medical experts. These measures were criticized by public health experts, medical organizations and the White House, which resulted in both New York and New Jersey relaxing their rules and actions. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie (R) and Hickox have been essentially arguing across the media, but ultimately the governor and his state relented and let Hickox leave after saying she was symptom free for 24 hours, a time frame that the state has still not explained. President Obama on Wednesday dismissed calls for quarantines and more aggressive travel restrictions. He said that the people who serve in West Africa "deserve our gratitude and they deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." The public health experts who have come out against mandatory quarantines have argued that these measures could deter other medical workers from traveling to West Africa, which could hinder the response to the outbreak and potentially lead to more cases. Doctors Without Borders, which has operated at the front lines of the Ebola epidemic, said in a statement Wednesday it "strongly disagrees with blanket forced quarantine," arguing that such measures go against established science and the advice of public health experts.
FORT KENT, Maine A nurse who cared for Ebola patients in Sierra Leone defied a state imposed quarantine Thursday morning, leaving her house for a short bicycle ride and setting up a legal fight with the State of Maine. The nurse, Kaci Hickox, left her house on the edge of Fort Kent just after 9 a.m., biking with her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, down a quiet paved road, followed closely by two police cars and a caravan of reporters. The couple rode less than a mile, then turned onto a graded gravel trail on a former railroad right of way flanked by pines. One police car, which has been posted outside her house for days, followed slowly behind. Ms. Hickox and her boyfriend, wearing jackets in the crisp Maine morning, returned to the house an hour later. It is not clear how Maine officials will respond. State officials said Wednesday that they would seek a court order to enforce a 21 day quarantine if Ms. Hickox left the house. "While we certainly respect the rights of one individual, we must be vigilant in protecting 1.3 million Mainers, as well as anyone who visits our great state," Gov. Paul R. LePage, a Republican, said in a statement on Wednesday. In Maine and elsewhere, the fight over Ebola was poised to be one of the final defining moments of the midterm elections, with Mr. LePage in a close race for re election, along with governors from both parties in other states that have imposed quarantines, including Connecticut, Georgia and Florida. Ms. Hickox has said the quarantine is unnecessary and counterproductive. "So many states have started enacting these policies that I think are just completely not evidence based," she said in an interview Wednesday. "They don't do a good job of balancing the risks and benefits when thinking about taking away an individual's rights." Norman Siegel, a prominent civil rights lawyer who is representing Ms. Hickox, said Wednesday that "in our view she is not restricted to do anything." Ms. Hickox's defiance put the focus for the next few days on one of the most remote reaches of the country, Fort Kent, a Canadian border town where the nurse shares a home with her boyfriend. If detained by officials, she will have three days to seek a court order to challenge the quarantine. Ms. Hickox, 33, returned last Friday from a month treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with the group Doctors Without Borders. She was isolated in a tent at a New Jersey hospital after she registered a low grade fever on a forehead scanner. She had not previously registered a fever and has not since. Ms. Hickox has never shown symptoms of the virus and tested negative for it several hours after being quarantined the disease is considered contagious only when a person displays symptoms. She was released Monday and allowed to travel to Maine after her lawyers threatened New Jersey officials with a legal challenge. In an interview Wednesday, Ms. Hickox said that the stigmatization of health workers had "exploded" across the country. She warned that quarantines would ultimately lead to families' being shuttered inside their homes and would deter aid workers from going to West Africa to treat Ebola at its origin. "I understand how fear spreads," she said. "But if I'm a nurse and I have a patient in the hospital, it's our responsibility as medical professionals to advocate for our patients. Now, it's the medical professionals who are being stigmatized. Even if there is popular public opinion, we still have to advocate for what's right."
Nurse Kaci Hickox defies the Maine's recommended quarantine and leaves her home to go for a bike ride on Thursday, while a legal battle is looming. Hickox, who came back last week from treating Ebola patients in West Africa, had been placed under mandatory quarantine in a hospital in New Jersey over the weekend based on the mandatory quarantine order of Governor Chris Christie. She criticized the new quarantine policy and claimed she was treated "inhumane" at a hospital in New Jersey. After twice testing negative for the Ebola, Hickox was discharged from the hospital and returned home to Maine on October 27. Hickox and her boyfriend stepped out of their home Thursday morning and rode away on mountain bikes in Fort Kent, Maine, while state police cruiser in tailing them. Police were monitoring her movements but could not detain her without a court order signed by a judge. Hickox bike ride comes a day after she said she will not let her civil rights be violated, stressing there is no need for her to be quarantined because she is showing no symptoms of Ebola. Maine Gov. Paul LePage instituted the 21 day quarantine order Monday and joined other states in going beyond federal guidelines and ordering returning Ebola health care workers to be self quarantined for 21 days. Reports said Maine health officials were going to court in an effort to keep Hickox in her home for the remainder of the 21 day incubation period for Ebola that ends on Nov. 10. Hickox lawyer, Norman Siegel, said if a judge grants the state request, then Hickox will appeal the decision on constitutional grounds, which will necessitate a hearing. Under Maine state law, a judge could grant temporary custody of someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." However, experts said Maine health officials could have a tough time convincing a judge that Hickox poses a threat and should be under mandatory quarantine since she isn't showing signs of the infection.
The Maine Medical Association and top infectious disease leaders in Maine have signed a letter criticizing the state's quarantine policies after state leaders vowed to take Fort Kent nurse Kaci Hickox to court to impose an in home quarantine. The letter was sent to the Press Herald Thursday morning. Hickox, who cared for Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, has defied the state's mandate that she stay home, going for a bike ride this morning with her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur. Two recent Maine epidemiologists Dr. Stephen Sears, who resigned his position in May, and Dr. Kathleen Gensheimer, who was the Maine epidemiologist for nearly 30 years before retiring in 2009 joined numerous state health care experts in opposition to the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention policies. Maine currently does not have an epidemiologist, but the Maine CDC is interviewing candidates. Dr. Lisa Ryan, president of the Maine Medical Association, told the Press Herald this morning that the Maine CDC's attempts to impose the quarantine against Hickox's led her and Dr. Lani Graham, a former state health officer, to write the letter and to round up top medical experts to join them, pointing out that the quarantine is not necessary and could become a disincentive for people to volunteer in countries stricken with infectious diseases. "What we have is a knee jerk, panic reaction without looking at the science," Ryan said. "Quarantining someone for 21 days is not necessary" for health workers who do not have symptoms and test negative for the disease. The U.S. CDC calls for monitoring health workers, not quarantining them. Hickox has tested negative for Ebola and does not have any symptoms, so she is not risking others by being out in society, Ryan said. Maine CDC Director Dr. Sheila Pinette pointed out in a news conference on Tuesday that, even if someone tests negative as Hickox has done, they could still fall ill with Ebola within a 21 day incubation period after their last exposure to Ebola. Hickox would pass the 21 days by Nov. 10. But Ryan said while it's true someone could develop Ebola later, they are not contagious if they don't have symptoms. "Once you have a fever and become ill and develop symptoms, that's when you could be putting someone at risk," Ryan said. "Until that happens, there is no risk." The letter states, "Ultimately, we need to be guided by science and not emotion. An epidemic of fear can be as dangerous as an epidemic with a virus."
(FORT KENT, Maine) A nurse who returned from fighting Ebola in West Africa challenged the demands that she remain quarantined by leaving her home Thursday morning for a bike ride with her boyfriend. Kaci Hickox, 33, went on the bike ride with her boyfriend in Fort Kent, Maine, after vowing last night she wasn't willing to "stand here and have my civil rights violated." State officials said they were preparing to file a court order to enforce a mandatory quarantine, but it would first have to be approved by a judge. Hickox was treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone for Doctors Without Borders. She returned to the United States on Friday, landing in Newark Liberty International Airport in New Jersey, where she was questioned and quarantined in an outdoor tent through the weekend despite having no symptoms of the lethal virus. Hickox registered a fever on an infrared thermometer at the airport, but an oral thermometer at University Hospital in Newark showed that she had no fever, she said. After twice testing negative for the Ebola, Hickox was released and returned home to Maine on Monday. Maine's health commissioner announced that Maine would join the handful of states going beyond federal guidelines and asking that returning Ebola health workers be self quarantined for 21 days. "Our true desire is for a voluntary separation from the public. We do not want to have to legally enforce an in home quarantine," Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said in a statement. "We are confident that the selfless health workers, who were brave enough to care for Ebola patients in a foreign country, will be willing to take reasonable steps to protect the residents of their own country. However, we are willing to pursue legal authority if necessary to ensure risk is minimized for Mainers." Hickox said she doesn't think it is reasonable. "I will go to court to attain my freedom," Hickox told Good Morning America Wednesday via Skype from her hometown of Fort Kent. "I have been completely asymptomatic since I've been here. I feel absolutely great." The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention doesn't consider health workers who treated Ebola patients in West Africa to be at "high risk" for catching Ebola if they were wearing protective gear, according to new guidelines announced this week. Since they have "some risk," the CDC recommends that they undergo monitoring tracking symptoms and body temperature twice a day avoid public transportation and take other precautions. But the CDC doesn't require home quarantines for these workers. Someone isn't contagious until Ebola symptoms appear, according to the CDC. And even then, transmission requires contact with bodily fluids such as blood and vomit.
US nurse Kaci Wilcox faces the media as she heads out on a bike ride. (WLBZ 2) A US nurse who recently returned from treating Ebola patients in Africa has taken a bike ride despite a state order to stay at home in quarantine. Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend rode their bicycles away from their house in the northeastern state of Maine as a gaggle of media looked on and cameras rolled, CNN reported. The pair were wearing bicycle helmets and did not speak to reporters. Two police cars followed them as they rode away. Controversy is raging about measures taken in some US states, such as New Jersey and New York, quarantine individuals returning from treating Ebola infected patients in west Africa. Hickox was kept in an isolation tent for three days after she returned to the United States from Sierra Leone. New Jersey Governor Chris Christie let her go on Monday, and she was driven to Maine. But there the state imposed its own quarantine. Hickox has vowed to fight the state of Maine, which wants to keep her in quarantine for the 12 days that remain of the virus's 21 day incubation period. But Maine said it will seek a court order to keep her at her home if necessary. "They will not allow me to leave my house and have any interaction with the public, even though I am completely healthy and symptom free," Hickox said as her boyfriend stood beside her home in the town of Fort Kent late on Wednesday. Hickox said that if the state does go to court to force her to stay isolated until November 10, she will file a challenge, NBC News reported. "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based," the nurse said.
ABC News(FORT KENT, Maine) A nurse who returned from fighting Ebola in West Africa challenged the demands that she remain quarantined by leaving her home Thursday morning for a bike ride with her boyfriend. Kaci Hickox, 33, went on the bike ride with her boyfriend in Fort Kent, Maine, after vowing last night she wasn't willing to "stand here and have my civil rights violated." State officials said they were preparing to file a court order to enforce a mandatory quarantine, but it would first have to be approved by a judge. Hickox was treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone for Doctors Without Borders. She returned to the United States on Friday, landing in Newark Liberty International Airport in New Jersey, where she was questioned and quarantined in an outdoor tent through the weekend despite having no symptoms of the lethal virus. Hickox registered a fever on an infrared thermometer at the airport, but an oral thermometer at University Hospital in Newark showed that she had no fever, she said. After twice testing negative for the Ebola, Hickox was released and returned home to Maine on Monday. Maine's health commissioner announced that Maine would join the handful of states going beyond federal guidelines and asking that returning Ebola health workers be self quarantined for 21 days. "Our true desire is for a voluntary separation from the public. We do not want to have to legally enforce an in home quarantine," Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said in a statement. "We are confident that the selfless health workers, who were brave enough to care for Ebola patients in a foreign country, will be willing to take reasonable steps to protect the residents of their own country. However, we are willing to pursue legal authority if necessary to ensure risk is minimized for Mainers." Hickox said she doesn't think it is reasonable. "I will go to court to attain my freedom," Hickox told Good Morning America Wednesday via Skype from her hometown of Fort Kent. "I have been completely asymptomatic since I've been here. I feel absolutely great." The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention doesn't consider health workers who treated Ebola patients in West Africa to be at "high risk" for catching Ebola if they were wearing protective gear, according to new guidelines announced this week. Since they have "some risk," the CDC recommends that they undergo monitoring tracking symptoms and body temperature twice a day avoid public transportation and take other precautions. But the CDC doesn't require home quarantines for these workers. Someone isn't contagious until Ebola symptoms appear, according to the CDC. And even then, transmission requires contact with bodily fluids such as blood and vomit. Follow ABCNewsRadio Copyright 2014 ABC News Radio
Maine's governor indicated today that he would abandon his demand that nurse Kaci Hickox remain under quarantine after treating Ebola patients if she would agree to take a blood test for the lethal virus. Gov. Paul LePage made his comment to ABC News today as Hickox defiantly challenged demands that she remain quarantined by leaving her home this morning for a bike ride with her boyfriend. LePage indicated to ABC News that he was willing to abandon his demands that the nurse remain quarantined if she would take a blood test for Ebola. While Hickox was pedaling, attorneys for the state of Maine went to Superior Court seeking a judge's permission to give Hickox a blood test for Ebola, LePage said. "This could be resolved today," the governor said. "She has been exposed and she's not cooperative, so force her to take a test. It's so simple." Medical experts have said that an Ebola test would only be positive if someone were symptomatic, and could register a negative result if the amount of Ebola virus in the blood hadn't reached a detectable level. The governor said he has a state police car stationed outside Hickox's home and that she has the town "scared to death." Hickox, 33, went on the bike ride in Fort Kent, Maine, after vowing last night she wasn't willing to "stand here and have my civil rights violated." While Hickox was pedaling, attorneys for the state of Maine went to Superior Court seeking a judge's permission to give Hickox a blood test for Ebola, Maine Gov. Paul LePage told ABC News. "This could be resolved today," LePage said. "She has been exposed and she's not cooperative, so force her to take a test. It's so simple." Medical experts have said that an Ebola test would only be positive if someone were symptomatic. The governor said he has a state police car stationed outside Hickox's home and that she has the town "scared to death." The nurse, who had been treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone for Doctors Without Borders, said she was fighting for her rights as well as other health care workers who will be returning from the Ebola hot zone in West Africa. She said that Doctors Without Borders told her another 20 health care workers will be coming home in the next month. "Most aid workers who come home just want to see their family and have a sort of normal life," she said Wednesday night. "I'm fighting for something other than myself. There are aid workers coming back every day." Hickox said she isn't committed to a quarantine that isn't "scientifically valid," she said while standing alongside her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, outside her home. The quarantine demand goes beyond guidelines put out by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which indicate that she can't spread Ebola if she isn't sick, doesn't have symptoms and no one is in close contact with her bodily fluids. "You could hug me, you could shake my hand and I would not give you Ebola," she said. HIckox returned to the United States on Oct. 24, landing in Newark Liberty International Airport in New Jersey, where she was questioned and quarantined in an outdoor tent through the weekend despite having no symptoms. Hickox registered a fever on an infrared thermometer at the airport, but an oral thermometer at University Hospital in Newark showed that she had no fever, she said. After twice testing negative for the Ebola, Hickox was released and returned home to Maine on Oct. 27. Maine's health commissioner announced that Maine would join the handful of states going beyond federal guidelines and asking that returning Ebola health workers be self quarantined for 21 days. But Hickox vowed to break the quarantine because it wasn't based on science. "I will go to court to attain my freedom," Hickox told "Good Morning America" Wednesday. "I have been completely asymptomatic since I've been here. I feel absolutely great." The CDC doesn't consider health workers who treated Ebola patients in West Africa to be at "high risk" for catching Ebola if they were wearing protective gear, according to new guidelines announced this week. Since they have "some risk," the CDC recommends that they undergo monitoring tracking symptoms and body temperature twice a day avoid public transportation and take other precautions. But the CDC doesn't require home quarantines for these workers. Someone isn't contagious until Ebola symptoms appear, according to the CDC. And even then, transmission requires contact with bodily fluids such as blood and vomit. Get real time updates as this story unfolds. To start, just "star" this story in ABC News' phone app. Download ABC News for iPhone here or ABC News for Android here. To be notified about our live weekend digital reports, tap here.
Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend Ted Wilbur went for a bike ride in Fort Kent Thursday (Ashley L. Conti, BDN) Kaci Hickox followed through Thursday morning on her pledge to defy home quarantine in Maine, leaving her residence for a bike ride with her boyfriend. Gov. Paul LePage has said the state will pursue legal action to enforce a 21 day quarantine on Hickox, a nurse who returned to Fort Kent after treating Ebola patients in West Africa. So what happens now? Under Maine law, the state could seek a court order to enforce the quarantine. But first it has to establish Hickox poses a "public health threat," as the term is defined in statute "Public health threat means any condition or behavior that can reasonably be expected to place others at significant risk of exposure to a toxic agent or environmental hazard or infection with a notifiable disease or condition." For further explanation, I turned to Paul Gauvreau, who represented the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention for a decade with the Maine Attorney General's Office. He retired in 2012, and now works part time for the AG's office. Gauvreau handled the 2006 case involving the arrest of a Portland man with tuberculosis that I wrote about earlier this week. Here's a potential sticking point Maine statute specifically references behavior by "an infected person." But Hickox hasn't been diagnosed with Ebola. Preliminary tests came back negative for the virus and she has no symptoms. Can the state prove an individual with no diagnosis or signs of illness poses a public health threat? "We never had a case that I've been involved in, when I was representing CDC, that we didn't have a confirmed case," Gauvreau said. There could be room in the statute for a court order if a person was exposed to an infectious illness and failed or refused to be in contact with authorities, said Gauvreau, who declined to speak about Hickox's case specifically. If the state can't determine whether a subject has symptoms and is engaging unsafe behaviors, legal action might be warranted, he said. Hickox has been in contact with Maine health officials, and a woman identified as a CDC worker stopped by her residence Wednesday afternoon. The state must not only establish that an individual poses an imminent threat of contagion, but also demonstrate that the counter measure it seeks in Hickox's case the 21 day quarantine in her home and regular monitoring is necessary to protect public health and that no less restrictive options are available, Gauvreau said. Hickox's lawyers would undoubtedly argue that less restrictive options are available. Hickox has said she'll agree to monitor herself and will allow public health workers to continue to check on her temperature and health. "We're trying to harmonize public safety with personal rights of individuals," Gauvreau said. The statute goes on to explain what risky behavior includes activity known to create a significant risk of transmitting a communicable disease, past behavior that indicates the person will engage in that kind of activity, failing to cooperate with a "departmental contact notification program," or refusing to comply with legal orders to prevent the spread of disease. If the court grants an order, it would be in effect no longer than 48 hours, Gauvreau said. A hearing before a judge would then be convened to decide whether to continue, modify or vacate the order, he said. Under some circumstances, public health authorities could ask for an order that takes effect immediately, but a hearing would have to be held within 48 hours, he said. Anyone subject to a court order has a right to legal representation and a say at the hearing. In instances where individuals defy a court order, an arrest warrant could potentially be filed. But warrants for public health orders, as opposed to criminal warrants, are harder to execute because law enforcement is less familiar with the process, Gauvreau said. Then there's the matter of protecting the arresting officer from potential infection. At a Wednesday evening news conference, Department of Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said the Maine attorney general's office was working on the necessary paperwork to seek a court order, and that the order could be submitted to a judge as soon as Wednesday night. We haven't seen it yet, but watch bangordailynews.com for updates.
Nurse Kaci Hickox goes for a bicycle ride with boyfriend Ted Wilbur, Oct. 30, 2014. Kaci Hickox took her campaign against an Ebola quarantine out for a spin on Thursday. The Maine nurse, openly defying an order to stay home after she treated patients in West Africa, sped off on a bike ride on a sunny morning with her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur. More from NBC News Nearly 50 Ebola Volunteers Returned Home Safe Obama Speaks With Health Workers on Front Lines Still a Mystery Puzzle of 'Fragile' Broncos Fan Authorities in Maine are pursuing a court order to enforce the quarantine through Nov. 10. Hickox says she is completely healthy and free of symptoms, and that the quarantine is unnecessary and unconstitutional. Hickox was kept in an isolation tent for three days after she returned to the United States last week. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie let her go on Monday, and she was driven to Maine, which imposed its own quarantine. Some states have gone further than federal health officials and ordered quarantines for health workers returning from Ebola stricken countries in Africa, even when they show no symptoms and therefore would not be contagious anyway. Read MoreNYC health dept disputes report Ebola doc lied Late Wednesday night, with a state trooper looking on, Hickox stepped outside the house in Fort Kent where she has been holed up. She said "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based."
FORT KENT, Maine A nurse who cared for Ebola patients in Sierra Leone defied Maine officials on Thursday morning, leaving her house for a short bicycle ride and setting up a legal fight over a 21 day quarantine. The nurse, Kaci Hickox, left her house on the edge of Fort Kent just after 9 a.m., biking with her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, down a quiet paved road, followed closely by two police cars and a caravan of reporters. The couple rode less than a mile, then turned onto a graded gravel trail on a former railroad right of way flanked by pines. One police car, which has been posted outside her house for days, followed slowly behind. Ms. Hickox and her boyfriend, wearing jackets in the crisp Maine morning, returned to the house an hour later. It is not clear how Maine officials will respond. State officials said Wednesday that they would seek a court order to enforce a 21 day quarantine if Ms. Hickox left the house. "While we certainly respect the rights of one individual, we must be vigilant in protecting 1.3 million Mainers, as well as anyone who visits our great state," Gov. Paul R. LePage, a Republican, said in a statement on Wednesday. In Maine and elsewhere, the fight over Ebola was poised to be one of the final defining moments of the midterm elections, with Mr. LePage in a close race for re election, along with governors from both parties in other states that have imposed quarantines, including Connecticut, Georgia and Florida. Ms. Hickox has said the quarantine is unnecessary and counterproductive. "So many states have started enacting these policies that I think are just completely not evidence based," she said in an interview Wednesday. "They don't do a good job of balancing the risks and benefits when thinking about taking away an individual's rights." Norman Siegel, a prominent civil rights lawyer who is representing Ms. Hickox, said Wednesday that "in our view she is not restricted to do anything." Ms. Hickox's defiance put the focus for the next few days on one of the most remote reaches of the country, Fort Kent, a Canadian border town where the nurse shares a home with her boyfriend. If detained by officials, she will have three days to seek a court order to challenge the quarantine. Ms. Hickox, 33, returned last Friday from a month treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with the group Doctors Without Borders. She was isolated in a tent at a New Jersey hospital after she registered a low grade fever on a forehead scanner. She had not previously registered a fever and has not since. Ms. Hickox has never shown symptoms of the virus and tested negative for it several hours after being quarantined the disease is considered contagious only when a person displays symptoms. She was released Monday and allowed to travel to Maine after her lawyers threatened New Jersey officials with a legal challenge. In an interview Wednesday, Ms. Hickox said that the stigmatization of health workers had "exploded" across the country. She warned that quarantines would ultimately lead to families' being shuttered inside their homes and would deter aid workers from going to West Africa to treat Ebola at its origin. "I understand how fear spreads," she said. "But if I'm a nurse and I have a patient in the hospital, it's our responsibility as medical professionals to advocate for our patients. Now, it's the medical professionals who are being stigmatized. Even if there is popular public opinion, we still have to advocate for what's right."
Maine authorities threaten to arrest nurse Kaci Hickox if she leaves her home. A nurse and the state of Maine are set to fight quarantine in court. A legal showdown over quarantine. The state of Maine wants a health care worker who treated Ebola patients to stay home and is considering legal action to enforce the quarantine. But the nurse says she won't stop fighting for her rights, even if she has to go to court. Not long ago Kaci Hickox was fighting Ebola. Now she says she's fighting Ebola fear. "You can hug me, you can shake my hand, there is no way that I would give you Ebola." But the state of Maine wants to keep Hickox home until November 10th. If she doesn't comply, the state will go to court. "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." But Maine health officials point to the case of Dr. Craig Spencer, who walked around Manhattan for days before being diagnosed with Ebola. "There are other cases where individuals have not tested positive, did not believe they were symptomatic, and quickly developed symptoms while they were out in the public." Rigid requirements could prevent needed aids from fighting the deadly virus. "These are people who have gone and endangered their lives to work with people with very limited resources. So to make it more difficult and to treat them as if they are a potential problem as opposed to a public asset, I think it is a shame." Hickox says the US Constitution and science are on her side and vows to challenge any legal action. "I don't want to hurt anyone in the public, but I don't think this is an acceptable line to be drawn." "I do not understand why this common sense approach to ask someone to stay in their home for 21 days during the incubation period, why that is not a reasonable request."
Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, left her home for a bike ride around 9 a.m. Thursday. Several members of the media and two state troopers in an unmarked car followed them up the road. "It's a beautiful day for a bike ride," Hickox said. Wilbur said they planned to bike to Fort Kent golf course and back, a round trip distance of about six miles. A trooper followed them onto Fort Kent Heritage Trail, an abandoned railroad bed running between Fort Kent and St. Francis, but did not attempt to stop them. Hickox returned to the United States from West Africa Thursday and was placed in an isolation tent at a Newark, N.J. hospital, despite showing no symptoms of Ebola and testing negative for the disease. New Jersey is one of several states, including Maine, demanding healthcare workers be placed under a mandatory 21 day quarantine upon returning from the Ebola hot zone. Gov. Chris Christie ultimately relented, allowing Hickox to leave after three days, and she arrived back in Fort Kent on Tuesday night. Hickox said Wednesday she had no plans to obey a quarantine past Thursday, and would challenge any legal action the state took against her. On Wednesday, Maine Department of Health and Human Services commissioner Mary Mayhew said the state intends to go forward with obtaining a court order to enforce the quarantine. Speaking to media outside her home Wednesday night, Hickox appeared frustrated but defiant. "We have been in negotiations all day with the state of Maine and tried to resolve this amicably, but they are not allowing me to leave my house and interact with the public even though I am completely healthy and symptom free," she said. "I am frustrated by this fact, and I have been told that it is the attorney general's intention to file legal action against me. And if this does occur, I will challenge the legal actions." Maine is one of several states that has implemented restrictions that exceed guidelines released this week by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which recommends people at "some risk" including healthcare workers who were in contact with Ebola patients but wore protective gear check their temperatures twice a day and have their public activities assessed on a case by case basis. In a White House statement Wednesday, President Obama directed implicit criticism at those states, which also include New Jersey, New York, Illinois and Florida, that are treating returning healthcare workers with fear rather than as "the heroes that they are." "We have to keep in mind that if we're discouraging our health care workers, who are prepared to make these sacrifices, from traveling to these places in need, then we're not doing our job in terms of looking after our own public health and safety," Obama said. "We've got hundreds of Americans from across the country nurses, doctors, public health workers, soldiers, engineers, mechanics who are putting themselves on the front lines of this fight," he said. "When they come home, they deserve to be treated properly. They deserve to be treated like the heroes that they are." Ebola, while very contagious, is relatively difficult to catch. It is only spread through contact with the bodily fluid of an infected person who is already showing symptoms.
Most Americans support a quarantine. Here's why the Obama administration doesn't agree. The Ebola debate literally took off Thursday morning, when nurse Kaci Hickox defied Maine officials and went for a bike ride in her hometown. Hickox, who recently returned from treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with Doctors Without Borders, has tested negative for the disease and insisted that she's healthy, asymptomatic, and not contagious. But New Jersey Governor Chris Christie ordered Hickox to be kept in mandatory quarantine in a tent outside the University Hospital in Newark last weekend before she was allowed to be transferred to Maine, where she was supposed to stay indoors. Maine health officials have said they would make "every possible effort to implement an agreed upon in home quarantine," but Hickox agreed only to two days. During an interview Wednesday, Hickox said she would leave home Thursday morning if the state didn't lift its restrictions, and then she did. The next step is unclear state health officials have said they plan to seek a court order to compel her to stay home. Many people wonder why Hickox can't just stay home Maine's Republican Governor Paul LePage said Hickox has the town "scared to death." According to the latest polls, the majority of Americans support quarantining asymptomatic travelers from West Africa. Politicians from Republican Senator Mitch McConnell to Christie and Democratic New York Governor Andrew Cuomo, have said it just makes sense to order a quarantine, and you don't need to be a doctor to see that. So why hasn't the Centers for Disease Control and the Obama administration embraced quarantines? Here are the arguments. Okay, what is the main argument against a quarantine? Health experts argue that a quarantine for health care workers is an overreaction that does more harm than good. Specifically, why would you go fight Ebola at its source if you'll be trapped at home for three weeks? That is the position President Obama has taken as well. On Wednesday, during a press conference with several doctors who worked with Ebola patients in West Africa, the president said that "we have to keep in mind that, if we are discouraging our health care workers who are prepared to make the sacrifices ... then we are not doing our job in terms of looking after our own public safety." Volunteers have said they wouldn't have been able to go to West Africa if they'd known they'd be quarantined even after testing negative for the disease. Ryan Boyko, a Yale graduate student being quarantined in Connecticut, spent three weeks in Liberia helping the Ministry of Health develop a contact tracing system. The Wall Street Journal asked him if he would have gone to Liberia if he knew he'd be quarantined, and he said he couldn't have. "I am supposed to be TA ing this semester," Boyko said. "I would have never been able to get permission to spend six weeks away in advance." How does the CDC's call for a voluntary self isolation differ from a quarantine? The CDC's new guidelines are less restrictive than the mandatory quarantine imposed by New York and New Jersey. It calls for people to voluntarily isolate themselves and avoid public transportation. Christie said earlier this week that the federal policy is confusing and sounds "like quarantine to me," but the key difference is that it doesn't treat health workers like pariahs. The CDC is not recommending that the state keep police cars stationed outside their homes, as happened to Hickox in Maine. It also distinguishes between high risk people those who were exposed to body fluids from Ebola patients and weren't wearing protective gear and lower risk individuals. The military has a mandatory 21 day quarantine in place. True, Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel announced on Wednesday a 21 day isolation period for military personnel coming back from the infected region. But there is a difference between a volunteer who goes to fight Ebola, then tries to return to normal life, and a soldier. As Hagel said, "they are not volunteers." After all, they are under orders. They'll also be getting paid. What about that Nobel Prize winner who said Christie's quarantine was a good idea? As Christie was quick to point out, Dr. Bruce Beutler is on his side https twitter.com GovChristie status 527083150749347840 Beutler shared the Nobel Prize for Medicine and Physiology in 2011 for his research on the immune system, so he's well qualified to talk about the way the body responds to diseases. He told NJ.com that it's not certain that people who are asymptomatic can't transmit the disease. Furthermore, he says he doesn't trust health care workers to self monitor. See? Science! But wait This proves that there's some debate. An editorial in The New England Journal of Medicine by seven doctors argued that "we have very strong reason to believe" that the disease is only transmitted when a person has a very high viral count. From NEJM This understanding is based on more than clinical observation the sensitive blood polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for Ebola is often negative on the day when fever or other symptoms begin and only becomes reliably positive 2 to 3 days after symptom onset. This point is supported by the fact that of the nurses caring for Thomas Eric Duncan, the man who died from Ebola virus disease in Texas in October, only those who cared for him at the end of his life, when the number of virions he was shedding was likely to be very high, became infected. Notably, Duncan's family members who were living in the same household for days as he was at the start of his illness did not become infected. I'm not convinced. That's fair, and there's a valid argument for being cautious. When Amber Vinson the second Dallas nurse to be infected in the United States took a round trip flight to Ohio, the CDC contacted everyone on both flights out of an abundance of caution. When it was found that Dr. Craig Spencer the New York case went bowling, the bowling alley was cleaned. In both cases the individuals reportedly didn't have symptoms when they went out in public, and there have been no new cases reported from those incidents. But the question now is whether it's better to calm the public by keeping people who test negative for Ebola and aren't showing symptoms in forced quarantines for three weeks, or to encourage medical workers to go to West Africa to help stop the epidemic. Enjoy this article? Follow BPolitics on Twitter and Like Bloomberg Television on Facebook
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE FORT KENT, Maine Kaci Hickox went bike riding with her boyfriend Thursday morning, defying state orders to remain at home for 21 days. The 33 year old nurse, who recently treated Ebola patients in West Africa, told reporters late Wednesday that day long negotiations had failed to resolve a deadlock over the quarantine issue. Hickox, who had vowed to ignore the state order beginning Thursday, and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, donned helmets, stepped off the front porch of his rural house around 9 a.m. and rode off on mountain bikes. They were followed by an unmarked state police car and a band of reporters and photographers. "It's a beautiful day for a bike ride," Hickox said as she pedaled away, the Bangor Daily News reports. They returned about an hour later. Without a court order, troopers do not have the authority to restrain her. Hickox appeared to test at least the spirit of the state order Wednesday night when she stepped outside Wilbur's house to speak to the news media and shake hands with one reporter. "It is not my intention to put anyone at risk in this community," she said. "We have been negotiating with the state of Maine all day and tried to resolve this amicably, but they will not allow me to leave my house and have any interaction with the public even though I am completely healthy and symptom free." Hickox, a nurse with Doctors Without Borders, arrived in Maine on Monday after being forcibly held in an isolation tent in New Jersey for three days under that state's strict new rule for health care workers who have recently treated Ebola patients in West Africa. Hickox was the first person pulled aside at Newark Liberty International Airport on Friday under new regulations after her return from Sierra Leone, one of the West African countries hardest hit by a deadly Ebola outbreak. She has not displayed symptoms of Ebola and was allowed to leave New Jersey Monday, traveling by private car to her boyfriend's home in Fort Kent, a rural town near the Canadian border. "We have to make decisions on science and I am completely healthy," she said. "You could hug me, you could shake my hand. There is no way I would give you Ebola." Maine health officials, who have instructed her to remain at the house for 21 days, say they don't have the authority yet to prevent her from leaving until a judge signs off on a court order. Gov. Paul LePage said Wednesday that he was seeking that legal authority. For now, Department of Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew says police, who sent two vehicles to the house Wednesday, will monitor Hickox if she leaves the house. Hickox shied away from commenting on LePage's involvement, saying she is "sticking to the science and away from the politics." "I didn't sign up for this," she said. "I flew into Newark airport on the wrong day. This has all been a little overwhelming to me. I think I am fighting for something much more than myself." Hickox said two dozen American health care workers will be returning from West Africa in the next month and "it scares me how they are going to be treated and how they are going to feel." She said she wanted to fight the kind of "stigmatization" once associated with AIDS. She said Wednesday that she had offered a compromise to the state in which she would agree to stay within the Fort Kent area and to travel only by private car, not public transportation. "I'd love to be able to go to the Moose Shack in Fort Kent and get an amazing slice of pizza and not be worried about what people are thinking or if I am going to get arrested by state troopers if I walk out of my property," she said. Northern Maine Medical Center says Hickox had originally agreed to a 21 day quarantine, according to WLBZ TV. NMMC also said Wilbur had also agreed to a self quarantine for 21 days and will be taking UMaine Fort Kent nursing classes online. There is no word on whether he would abide by quarantine for the full period. Hickox, according to her attorney, had only agreed to remain home for two days after arriving from New Jersey. Kaitlyn Chana reports for WLBZ TV in Bangor.Contributing Associated Press CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story http www.krem.com story news nation 2014 10 30 ebola nurse maine quarantine 18181645
EBOLA nurse Kaci Hickox has defied an order to stay home after she treated patients in West Africa, going for a bike ride overnight with her boyfriend. Ms Hickox and her boyfriend Ted Wilbur rode their bicycles away from their house in the north eastern state of Maine on Thursday as a gaggle of media looked on and cameras rolled. The pair were wearing bicycle helmets and did not speak to reporters. Two police cars followed them as they rode away. Controversy is raging about measures taken in some US states, such as New Jersey and New York, quarantine individuals returning from treating Ebola infected patients in west Africa. Ms Hickox was kept in an isolation tent for three days after she returned to the United States from Sierra Leone. New Jersey Governor Chris Christie let her go on Monday, and she was driven to Maine. But there the state imposed its own quarantine. Ms Hickox has vowed to fight the state of Maine, which wants to keep her in quarantine for the 12 days that remain of the virus's 21 day incubation period. But Maine said it will seek a court order to keep her at her home if necessary. "They will not allow me to leave my house and have any interaction with the public, even though I am completely healthy and symptom free," Ms Hickox said as her boyfriend stood beside her home in the town of Fort Kent. Ms Hickox said that if the state does go to court to force her to stay isolated until November 10, she will file a challenge, NBC News reported. "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based," the nurse said.
Hickox says she plans to take the issue to court if Maine does not lift the quarantine AP A nurse who returned to the US after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone has defied a quarantine for health care workers, leaving her home in Fort Kent, Maine, to go for an hour long bike ride. Kaci Hickox defied the quarantine on Thursday despite state officials saying on Wednesday that they would seek a court order to enforce the quarantine if she left her house before November 10. "I'm free to go on a bike ride in my home town," the 33 year old nurse told reporters as she arrived back at her home. Hickox, who tested negative for the virus on her return, said she plans to take the issue to court if Maine does not lift the quarantine. The 33 year old previously blasted New Jersey Governor Chris Christie after she was taken from an airport and put in quarantine in a tent before being driven to her home in Maine to spend the rest of the 21 day quarantine. Twenty one days is the maximum incubation period for Ebola. Hickox contends there is no need for quarantine and has called the measure "scientifically unsound". Ebola is spread through contact with bodily fluids from a person showing symptoms and is not airborne. More than 13,700 people have contracted Ebola, with nearly 5,000 killed by the virus, all but a few of them in Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia.
Nurse's Bike Ride Defying Ebola Quarantine Could Set Legal Precedent The standoff in Maine may influence policy around the nation A morning bike ride in a rural Maine town may have set in motion a chain of events that could determine how state and local governments respond to outbreaks of contagious diseases. Kaci Hickox a Maine nurse who recently returned from treating Ebola patients in West Africa has remained at odds with state health officials after she was placed under quarantine even though she tested negative for the virus and has not shown any symptoms. On Thursday, Hickox defied Maine's isolation order, leaving her Fort Kent home for a bike ride with her boyfriend. They were trailed by state police, but the officers were powerless to stop her. That's because the quarantine issued by the Maine Department of Health and Human Services is considered "voluntary," meaning the state needs a court order to prevent Hickox from actually leaving her home. State officials have filed an order to make it mandatory, and on Thursday, Gov. Paul LePage tried to broker a compromise when he told ABC News that the state would drop the quarantine if Hickox submitted to a blood test for the disease. The episode could set a precedent for how infectious diseases are dealt with in the future. Public health experts say that depending on how the court decides, the case could either further establish that states have wide latitude in deciding who can be quarantined, or bolster the argument that the civil liberties of those who have no symptoms cannot be unduly restrained, even in a time of a public health emergency. "The court could be plowing new legal ground," says Robert Field, a professor of law and public health at Drexel University. "The decision would only be binding in Maine, but it could influence the thinking of courts around the country." A court order would force the state to show that Hickox's confinement is justified and based on medical science, but that could be difficult considering Hickox has yet to show symptoms of Ebola. She says she has been tested twice since her return to the U.S. on Oct. 24 and the result came back negative each time. Emory University law professor Polly Price says if the court decides in favor of the Maine health officials, other states may "feel free to post armed guards outside of asymptomatic people's houses, or confine them in an institution." If a judge finds in favor of a mandatory quarantine, Hickox can still appeal based on her constitutional right of due process, and her lawyers have pledged to do so. Either way, some experts fear that the case may also have a more short term impact on Americans still looking to help Ebola patients in West Africa, where almost 5,000 people have died from the disease, according to the Centers for Disease Control. "It's a knee jerk reaction that won't do very much to protect the people of Maine or the U.S.," says Susan Kim, a Georgetown University law professor. "It will, however, hurt efforts to contain the epidemic in West Africa if we treat returning health care workers like pariahs."
Kaci Hickox speaks to her lawyer Norman Siegel from a hospital quarantine tent in Newark, New Jersey, on October 26, 2014. Steve Hyman Handout via Reuters Kaci Hickox, the nurse who was placed under quarantine in New Jersey last Friday after she returned from treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, was released on Monday afternoon, The Wall Street Journal reports, and is on her way to her home in Maine. Over the weekend, Hickox criticized the conditions of her quarantine, even retaining the services of lawyers to defend her rights. The question of whether her quarantine was legal "remains to be addressed and resolved," lawyer Norman Siegel, who is representing Hickox, told The New York Times Monday. When imposing involuntary isolation or quarantine, public health officials must rely on "a reasonable basis grounded in the best available information that somebody is known to be infected or suspected to be infected or exposed," says James Hodge, director of the Public Health Law and Policy Program at Arizona State University. Hickox "had come from a hot zone that, plus fever, might get you into this realm." Newsweek Magazine is Back In Print The mandatory quarantine issued Friday by New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo stipulated that all health care workers returning from the African countries most affected by the Ebola outbreak be quarantined for 21 days. The directive was criticized by medical experts and aid organizations, and the White House warned of its "unintended consequences." By Sunday, Cuomo said health care workers could be quarantined at home, and on Monday New Jersey officials released Hickox, who will be self quarantined at home in Maine. In an essay published in Dallas News Saturday, Hickox described being held in isolation at New Jersey's Newark Liberty International Airport for several hours upon her arrival the previous day. She was "left alone for long stretches," she said, and "given only a granola bar when she said she was hungry." She was then transferred to a tent outside University Hospital in Newark, where she remained until Monday. Hickox blasted the isolation as medically unnecessary, and some prominent public health experts, including Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, agreed. "As a scientist and as a health person, if I were asked I would not have recommended mandatory quarantines ," Fauci said, according to ABC News. Hickox said she felt her "basic human rights" had been violated. Siegel, who served as director of the New York Civil Liberties Union from 1985 to 2000, told Reuters on Sunday that the quarantine raised "serious constitutional and civil liberties issues" and that Hickox may file a federal lawsuit challenging her confinement. "We're not going to dispute that the government has, under certain circumstances, the right to issue a quarantine," Siegel told Reuters. "The policy is overly broad when applied to her." Siegel did not respond to requests for comment from Newsweek. Hickox disputes the claim by the New Jersey Health Department and Christie that she did in fact pose a credible threat to the public's health, saying she was not displaying any symptoms when she arrived at the airport and therefore did not pose a risk of infecting others even if she did test positive for the disease, which she did not. "My temperature was taken using a forehead scanner, and it read a temperature of 98," she wrote in The Dallas Morning News. The New Jersey Health Department said in a statement that Hickox had briefly developed a fever on Friday. Fever is a symptom of Ebola, but Hickox says her temperature rose to 101 after being held in the airport for about seven hours, according to The Dallas Morning News. Udi Ofer of the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey told The New York Times that the legality of Hickox's quarantine could be questioned if she was asymptomatic. Another expert, Nicholas Terry of the Hall Center for Law and Health at Indiana University, said that "if the order was directed only at travelers in countries affected by Ebola and did not say they had to be symptomatic, then her only choice would be to challenge the validity of the order itself." According to a New Jersey statute, "In order to prevent the spread of disease affecting humans," the Department of Health has the legal authority to " r emove any person infected with a communicable disease to a suitable place, if in its judgment removal is necessary and can be accomplished without any undue risk to the person infected." Statutes like this are "pretty common and typical," according to Hodge. "If isolation or quarantine was not properly implemented with full substantive and procedural due process, there could be trouble" for the state of New Jersey, he says, but "the sheer reality is there is Supreme Court precedent and a considerable number of additional cases in the history of this country that all suggest your liberties stop when you present threats to the public's health." One of the most famous cases in public health law is a 1905 ruling on compulsory vaccinations, Hodge says. In Jacobson v. Massachusetts, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the state of Massachusetts had sufficient public health authority to enforce compulsory vaccinations. Vaccinations, as well as isolation and quarantine measures, are "all within the gambit of what states as sovereigns like New Jersey and New York have the authority to do," Hodge adds. "Your civil liberties are not sufficient to overcome states' strong interest in protecting the public's health."
FORT KENT, Maine A nurse who cared for Ebola patients in Sierra Leone defied a state imposed quarantine Thursday, leaving her house for a short bicycle ride and setting up a legal fight with the state of Maine. The nurse, Kaci Hickox, left her house on the edge of Fort Kent just after 9 a.m., biking with her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, down a quiet paved road, followed closely by two police cars and a caravan of reporters. The couple rode less than a mile, and then turned onto a graded gravel trail on a former railroad right of way flanked by pines. One police car, which has been posted outside her house for days, followed slowly behind. Hickox and her boyfriend returned to the house an hour later. It is not clear how Maine officials will respond. State officials said Wednesday that they would seek a court order to enforce a 21 day quarantine if Hickox left the house. "While we certainly respect the rights of one individual, we must be vigilant in protecting 1.3 million Mainers, as well as anyone who visits our great state," Gov. Paul R. LePage, a Republican, said in a statement Wednesday. In Maine and elsewhere, the fight over Ebola was poised to be one of the final defining moments of the midterm elections, with LePage in a close race for re election, along with governors from both parties in other states that have imposed quarantines, including Connecticut, Georgia and Florida. Hickox has said the quarantine is unnecessary and counterproductive. "So many states have started enacting these policies that I think are just completely not evidence based," she said in an interview Wednesday. "They don't do a good job of balancing the risks and benefits when thinking about taking away an individual's rights." Norman Siegel, a prominent civil rights lawyer who is representing Hickox, said Wednesday that "in our view she is not restricted to do anything." Hickox's defiance put the focus for the next few days on one of the most remote reaches of the country, Fort Kent, a Canadian border town where the nurse shares a home with her boyfriend. If detained by officials, she will have three days to seek a court order to challenge the quarantine. Hickox, 33, returned last Friday from a month treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with the group Doctors Without Borders. She was isolated in a tent at a New Jersey hospital after she registered a low grade fever on a forehead scanner. She had not previously registered a fever and has not since. Hickox has never shown symptoms of the virus and tested negative for it several hours after being quarantined the disease is considered contagious only when a person displays symptoms. She was released Monday and allowed to travel to Maine after her lawyers threatened New Jersey officials with a legal challenge. In an interview Wednesday, Hickox said that the stigmatization of health workers had "exploded" across the country. She warned that quarantines would ultimately lead to families' being shuttered inside their homes and would deter aid workers from going to West Africa to treat Ebola at its origin. "I understand how fear spreads," she said. "But if I'm a nurse and I have a patient in the hospital, it's our responsibility as medical professionals to advocate for our patients. Now, it's the medical professionals who are being stigmatized. Even if there is popular public opinion, we still have to advocate for what's right."
New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie said Monday the state would release Kaci Hickox, an American nurse who had been forcibly confined to a hospital isolation tent upon arrival from West Africa despite showing no signs of Ebola. VPC 496 CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE FORT KENT, Maine Kaci Hickox went bike riding with her boyfriend Thursday morning, defying state orders to remain at home for 21 days. The 33 year old nurse, who recently treated Ebola patients in West Africa, told reporters late Wednesday that day long negotiations had failed to resolve a deadlock over the quarantine issue. Hickox, who had vowed to ignore the state order beginning Thursday, and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, donned helmets, stepped off the front porch of his rural house around 9 a.m. and rode off on mountain bikes. They were followed by an unmarked state police car and a band of reporters and photographers. "It's a beautiful day for a bike ride," Hickox said as she pedaled away, the Bangor Daily News reports. They returned about an hour later. Without a court order, troopers do not have the authority to restrain her. Hickox appeared to test at least the spirit of the state order Wednesday night when she stepped outside Wilbur's house to speak to the news media and shake hands with one reporter. "It is not my intention to put anyone at risk in this community," she said. "We have been negotiating with the state of Maine all day and tried to resolve this amicably, but they will not allow me to leave my house and have any interaction with the public even though I am completely healthy and symptom free." Hickox, a nurse with Doctors Without Borders, arrived in Maine on Monday after being forcibly held in an isolation tent in New Jersey for three days under that state's strict new rule for health care workers who have recently treated Ebola patients in West Africa. Hickox was the first person pulled aside at Newark Liberty International Airport on Friday under new regulations after her return from Sierra Leone, one of the West African countries hardest hit by a deadly Ebola outbreak. She has not displayed symptoms of Ebola and was allowed to leave New Jersey Monday, traveling by private car to her boyfriend's home in Fort Kent, a rural town near the Canadian border. "We have to make decisions on science and I am completely healthy," she said. "You could hug me, you could shake my hand. There is no way I would give you Ebola." Maine health officials, who have instructed her to remain at the house for 21 days, say they don't have the authority yet to prevent her from leaving until a judge signs off on a court order. Gov. Paul LePage said Wednesday that he was seeking that legal authority. For now, Department of Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew says police, who sent two vehicles to the house Wednesday, will monitor Hickox if she leaves the house. Hickox shied away from commenting on LePage's involvement, saying she is "sticking to the science and away from the politics." "I didn't sign up for this," she said. "I flew into Newark airport on the wrong day. This has all been a little overwhelming to me. I think I am fighting for something much more than myself." Hickox said two dozen American health care workers will be returning from West Africa in the next month and "it scares me how they are going to be treated and how they are going to feel." She said she wanted to fight the kind of "stigmatization" once associated with AIDS. She said Wednesday that she had offered a compromise to the state in which she would agree to stay within the Fort Kent area and to travel only by private car, not public transportation. "I'd love to be able to go to the Moose Shack in Fort Kent and get an amazing slice of pizza and not be worried about what people are thinking or if I am going to get arrested by state troopers if I walk out of my property," she said. Northern Maine Medical Center says Hickox had originally agreed to a 21 day quarantine, according to WLBZ TV. NMMC also said Wilbur had also agreed to a self quarantine for 21 days and will be taking UMaine Fort Kent nursing classes online. There is no word on whether he would abide by quarantine for the full period. Hickox, according to her attorney, had only agreed to remain home for two days after arriving from New Jersey. Kaitlyn Chana reports for WLBZ TV in Bangor. Contributing Associated Press 496 CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story http www.firstcoastnews.com story news nation 2014 10 30 nurse defies quarantine bike ride 18183285
Defying the Maine governor's voluntary quarantine request, nurse Kaci Hickox went for a bike ride with her boyfriend Thursday. Riding her bike, she told reporters she hoped to resolve the situation amicably. It was the second time Hickox broke her contested quarantine, including a brief meeting with reporters outside her home on Wednesday. She even shook a hand from someone who offered it. "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based," Hickox said. Hickox was surrounded by media for the one hour jaunt through the Northern Maine countryside. They traversed country lanes and hiking trails on their mountain bike, all the time being tailed by a state police vehicle. Absent a court order, police couldn't stop her. Showing no symptoms, testing negative for Ebola and feeling great despite calls for a 21 day quarantine, Hickox has fought the attempt to keep her inside her home. She had been kept in a New Jersey hospital medical tent following her recent return from West Africa where she had helped treat Ebola patients. Maine officials have gone to court to seek Hickox's detention through Nov. 10 when the 21 day Ebola incubation period ends for her. Hickox also has retained counsel and may consider countersuing the state for curbing her civil rights. Norman Siegel, one of Hickox's attorneys said fear about her condition was "not based on medical facts," adding, "there's a lot of misinformation about how Ebola is transmitted." Hickox was a Doctors Without Borders volunteer in Sierra Leone. When she returned to the U.S. she was forced into quarantine by an order from New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie that people arriving at Newark's airport from West Africa had to be quarantined for 21 days Hickox was forced to spend a weekend in a New Jersey hospital tent before returning to Maine where she shares a home with a boyfriend who is a nursing student at an University of Maine campus. Ebola only spreads through direct contact with bodily fluids from someone infected with the disease, according to scientists. While the disease has killed more than 4,000 people in West Africa, only four people in the U.S., three of them health workers treating an Ebola patient, have been infected.
U.S. healthcare workers who volunteer to join the fight in Africa against Ebola have a new question to ask themselves these days How would they feel about a 21 day quarantine when they get back home? Two healthcare workers on opposite sides of the country are answering that question very differently right now. In Maine, feisty nurse Kaci Hickox is refusing to abide by a state request that she self quarantine herself for 21 days. Hickox was initially kept in a tent outside a New Jersey hospital after returning through Newark Airport from a stint volunteering in Sierra Leone. She's hired an attorney and threatened to sue first New Jersey, and now Maine, to be able to resume her normal daily life. But in California, a doctor on the faculty at Stanford Health Care is voluntarily subjecting himself to a 21 day home quarantine after his return from treating Ebola patients in Liberia. Dr. Colin Bucks "out of an abundance of caution, will isolate himself for 21 days following his last known contact with an infected patient. During that time, Dr. Bucks will reside alone and will be monitored by state and county health department personnel," Stanford announced in a release. He'll be paid for his time at home, Stanford also said. Both healthcare workers are asymptomatic, although there is disagreement about whether Hickox had a fever when she landed at Newark. One is being praised by his employer the other has state police cars parked outside her Fort Kent, Me. home while the state seeks a court order to have her self quarantine. "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based," Hickox said of Maine's self quarantine request. With a patchwork of state quarantine requirements now in place, and new Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines that add another level of complexity to the quarantine question, any healthcare worker planning to go to Africa has to be thinking about how they'd react to a 21 day quarantine, if for no other reason than the weight of public opinion that will follow them when they come back from their overseas tour.
Negotiations with nurse Kaci Hickox, who refuses to be quarantined after treating Ebola patients in West Africa, have "failed" and the governor of Maine will now "exercise the full extent of his authority," according to a statement from the governor's office. Gov. Paul LePage didn't say whether that meant getting a court order to enforce Hickox's quarantine or forcing her to take an Ebola blood test. Earlier today, LePage indicated to ABC News that he would abandon his demand that Hickox remain under quarantine if she would agree to take a blood test for the lethal virus. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of healthcare workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," LePage said. RELATED 6 travelers to Indiana monitored for Ebola symptoms RELATED Purdue professor says Ebola "primed" to go airborne The governor made his comment after Hickox defiantly challenged demands that she remain quarantined by leaving her home in Fort Kent this morning for a bike ride with her boyfriend. She was trailed by a police car as she rode. "This could be resolved today," the governor said. "She has been exposed and she's not cooperative, so force her to take a test. It's so simple." Medical experts have said that an Ebola test would only be positive if someone were symptomatic, and could register a negative result if the amount of Ebola virus in the blood hadn't reached a detectable level. LePage's office later put out a statement saying negotiations with Hickox had failed and the governor will now "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law." "Maine statutes provide robust authority to the state to use legal measures to address threats to public health," the statement said. It added, "Specifics of the process or steps being taken by the state at this time may not be discussed publicly due to the confidentially requirements in law." The governor said he has a state police car stationed outside Hickox's home and that she has the town "scared to death." ort Kent has a "little rural hospital and if she goes in there she shuts down the whole community," the governor said. Hickox, 33, went on her bike ride after vowing Wednesday night she wasn't willing to "stand here and have my civil rights violated." The nurse, who had been treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone for Doctors Without Borders, said she was fighting for her rights as well as other health care workers who will be returning from the Ebola hot zone in West Africa. She said that Doctors Without Borders told her another 20 health care workers will be coming home in the next month. "Most aid workers who come home just want to see their family and have a sort of normal life," she said Wednesday night. "I'm fighting for something other than myself. There are aid workers coming back every day." Hickox said she isn't committed to a quarantine that isn't "scientifically valid," she said while standing alongside her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, outside her home. The quarantine demand goes beyond guidelines put out by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which indicate that she can't spread Ebola if she isn't sick, doesn't have symptoms and no one is in close contact with her bodily fluids. "You could hug me, you could shake my hand and I would not give you Ebola," she said. HIckox returned to the United States on Oct. 24, landing in Newark Liberty International Airport in New Jersey, where she was questioned and quarantined in an outdoor tent through the weekend despite having no symptoms. Hickox registered a fever on an infrared thermometer at the airport, but an oral thermometer at University Hospital in Newark showed that she had no fever, she said. After twice testing negative for Ebola, Hickox was released and returned home to Maine on Oct. 27. Maine's health commissioner announced that Maine would join the handful of states going beyond federal guidelines and asking that returning Ebola health workers be self quarantined for 21 days. "I will go to court to attain my freedom," Hickox told Good Morning America Wednesday. "I have been completely asymptomatic since I've been here. I feel absolutely great." The CDC doesn't consider health workers who treated Ebola patients in West Africa to be at "high risk" for catching Ebola if they were wearing protective gear, according to new guidelines announced this week. Since they have "some risk," the CDC recommends that they undergo monitoring tracking symptoms and body temperature twice a day avoid public transportation and take other precautions. But the CDC doesn't require home quarantines for these workers. Someone isn't contagious until Ebola symptoms appear, according to the CDC. And even then, transmission requires contact with bodily fluids such as blood and vomit.
Kaci Hickox went for a bike ride Thursday, defying Maine's "voluntary" quarantine that she's fought against for the past week. The nurse's refusal to stay in her home has ignited debate over whether she should be considered a hero for volunteering to fight Ebola in West Africa or a selfish danger to the public. TV personality Piers Morgan made his opinion clear in a harshly worded opinion piece in the Daily Mail in which he called Hickox "utterly selfish." "Nurse Hickox should stop her pathetic squealing, fire her lawyer, get off TV, thank her lucky stars she's not got Ebola, and stay inside her damn home for the next couple of weeks to ensure there's not a tiny scintilla of chance she could infect a fellow American," he argued. Others sought to quell fears. Charles Blow, of the New York Times, said Hickox "is a paladin being treated like a leper," and that mandatory quarantines would discourage health workers from volunteering in West Africa. Hickox, a 33 year old nurse, spent a month treating Ebola patients in West Africa with Doctors Without Borders and returned to the U.S. last week through Liberty International Airport in Newark, New Jersey. Airport screeners found she had a 101 degree Fahrenheit fever and New Jersey state authorities quarantined her shortly after. Hickox fought fiercely against the quarantine and criticized New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing it. At the time of her travels, a New York doctor tested positive for the virus after returning from treating Ebola in West Africa, prompting Christie and New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo to announce a new policy requiring any health care workers returning from treating Ebola patients to be quarantined for 21 days. Hickox was released on Monday, reportedly following pressure on Christie from the Obama Administration. She was allowed to go home to Maine, where she was expected to stay in isolation. She tested negative for the virus while in quarantine in New Jersey, but Hickox's blood wouldn't test positive for the virus until she was symptomatic, so there's still a possibility that she does have Ebola. The widely accepted practice is to have potential Ebola patients self monitor and report symptoms immediately, but some don't trust workers to do so. Maine Gov. Paul LePage said he will allow Hickox to stay out of quarantine if she agrees to take a blood test. While most Americans have virtually no chance of contracting Ebola, the fear that health care workers returning from fighting the disease in West Africa will spread it in the U.S. continues to concern the public. A Pew Research study found that 41 percent of respondents were "worried that they themselves or someone in their family will be exposed to the virus," and 17 percent said they are "very worried." As the first health care worker to be quarantined under the new travel policies, Hickox has become a focal point of the national debate on how to stop Ebola. The general consensus in the medical community is that a quarantine is unnecessary. Dr. Arthur Caplan, director of the Division of Medical Ethics at NYU Langone Medical Center, said the quarantine is more about quelling public fear than it is about containing the virus. But some dissenting voices have made themselves heard. Dr. Marc Siegel, an internist and media figure, said a mandatory quarantine would calm the public and keep people safer. "We need a consistent policy to protect and reassure us at least until our confidence in the public health response to Ebola stabilizes," he said. Maine Nurse Kaci Hickox Can Swap Quarantine for Blood Test, Governor Tells ABC News via ... http t.co Q5b3f7UxNz pic.twitter.com ogrl6R1sbO " bonnie ( boniemylurv) October 30, 2014 Many Americans have expressed anger with Hickox for leaving her home and potentially exposing others to Ebola. TV personality Geraldo Rivera said Hickox was "squandering the goodwill that she righteously earned in Africa by being arrogant." All Kaci Hickox is, is a spoiled brat who wants her way. And her way only. GoSpursGo ( Jason Wacker) October 30, 2014 Kaci Hickox making good doctors and nurses look bad with her selfish publicity stunt ....http t.co 0ts7G3gliW Ebola KaciHickox LoneWolf ( SurlyBull) October 30, 2014 Hickox obviously getting the attention she seeks. It's too bad we can't ignore her dangerous precedent. The next defier could be a spreader greybeard ( greybeard411) October 30, 2014 Kaci Hickox on a bike ride Quarantine? Will I not abide Accused of being a shrew She tells the world, FU! Now her rep smells like low tide Seamus ( SeamusTx) October 30, 2014 Good 4 Nurse KaciHickox 4 going abt her own life forcing leaders to lead on facts, not fear. Totally support you sister! FactsNotFear " Maria Cardona ( MariaTCardona) October 30, 2014
Morphing from praiseworthy Florence Nightingale to self indulgent Joan of Arc, Ebola nurse Kaci Hickox went for a quarantine defying bicycle ride with her boyfriend in vindication of her right to be irresponsible. Hickox says that, because she is symptom free, science guarantees her ability to circulate at will, spared of inconvenience. But, should she begin running a fever tomorrow, the picture would flip from, "Give me liberty or give me death," to "Give me liberty and give you death." We say that knowing full well about the teachings of medicine The chances of one person transmitting Ebola to another are next to nil until a sufferer begins showing signs of the disease, such as a fever. And then, the virus is passed by transmission of bodily fluids. The overriding point that escapes Hickox in her attention to self is that health authorities must act in the best interests of society at large, which includes assuring the public that officials have set standards designed to minimize, if not eliminate, fear. Volunteers like Hickox have valiantly gone forth to fight Ebola after calculating the chances of infection. President Obama and Mayor de Blasio are among the many who have praised their bravery. While amply justified, each commendation reinforces the peril inherent in Ebola to a general population that is neither as selfless as the volunteers nor as ready to assume the risk of contagion. If science were the only measure, Bellevue Hospital staff members would not be shunning their colleagues in the Ebola unit. Nor would the U.S. military be quarantining service members after duty in West Africa. Clearly the brass is setting them apart to maintain the cohesion of the units to which they are assigned stateside. Hickox would be well advised to remember that she wound up in a hospital tent in Newark and then under a confinement order in Maine only because her fellow Ebola volunteer, Dr. Craig Spencer, traipsed about New York City before running a fever. While the dictates of science said there was scant reason for worry, health workers disinfected many of the places visited by Spencer, traced the people with whom he came in contact and confined several of his friends. Why? Out of "an abundance of caution" and to bolster public confidence. Interestingly, Hickox threw down her challenge to Maine's quarantine by pedaling isolated country roads. She didn't have the nerve to join her neighbors for a cup of coffee at a local diner. Some would have fled and the joint would have closed for days, demonstrating why she should be staying home.
I wrote yesterday about Kaci Hickox, the Maine nurse whose self sacrifice abroad, treating the Ebola stricken in Sierra Leone, has not translated into nobility back in the States. Via the New York Times A nurse who cared for Ebola patients in Sierra Leone defied Maine officials on Thursday morning, leaving her house for a short bicycle ride and setting up a legal fight over a 21 day quarantine ordered by the state. The nurse, Kaci Hickox, left her house on the edge of Fort Kent just after 9 a.m., biking with her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, down a quiet paved road, followed closely by two police cars and a caravan of reporters. The couple rode less than a mile, then turned onto a graded gravel trail on a former railroad right of way flanked by pines. One police car, which has been posted outside her house for days, followed slowly behind. Ms. Hickox and her boyfriend, wearing jackets in the crisp Maine morning, returned to the house an hour later. . . . It is not clear how Maine officials will respond. State officials said Wednesday that they would seek a court order to enforce the quarantine if Ms. Hickox left the house. Hickox's situation does, no question, raise the timeless question of how to balance liberty and security in this case, to what degree can the government abridge an individual's liberty in the interests of public health? That is, always has been, and always will be a question of prudence there are no formulae for making such a determination. In this particular case, though, it is rather difficult to argue that Hickox's rights are being unceremoniously trampled (or that forcing Hickox to remain in her house will stimulate widespread government overreach). Ebola is a very nasty disease, and Hickox, having been a medical volunteer in West Africa for a month, is as obvious a potential patient as they come. Individual citizens are sometimes forced to endure inconveniences in the interest of more pressing goals. That is not automatically tyranny it is usually just the reality of living in a community. When governors start quarantining anyone with a sniffle, then pitchforks will be appropriate. But there is, along with this philosophical question, a more basic, human one What about decency? As I wrote yesterday, "When it comes to a disease that liquefies your internal organs and pushes blood out your eyeballs, 'Better safe than sorry' would seem a dictum to which everyone could agree." But Hickox evidently does not. It may turn out that she is Ebola free, and always has been she has tested negative so far. That would be good news. But for two more weeks, the risk remains. Has Hickox not considered that maybe, just maybe, it would be advisable to take one for the team just in case? Instead, she has turned herself into a martyr and now a rebel, violating the state's quarantine order with lan. I can sympathize with Hickox's restlessness, being forced to remain at home despite feeling perfectly spry. But really, the prospect of a government enforced mandate to stay at home, order in, read, and watch Netflix with one's significant other seems a far cry from the gulag. In fact, I would welcome it. I could finally catch up on The Last Ship.
Negotiations with nurse Kaci Hickox, who refuses to be quarantined after treating Ebola patients in West Africa, have "failed" and the governor of Maine will now "exercise the full extent of his authority," according to a statement from the governor's office. Gov. Paul LePage didn't say whether that meant getting a court order to enforce Hickox's quarantine or forcing her to take an Ebola blood test. Earlier today, LePage indicated to ABC News that he would abandon his demand that Hickox remain under quarantine if she would agree to take a blood test for the lethal virus. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of healthcare workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," LePage said. The governor made his comment after Hickox defiantly challenged demands that she remain quarantined by leaving her home in Fort Kent this morning for a bike ride with her boyfriend. She was trailed by a police car as she rode. While Hickox was pedaling, attorneys for the state of Maine went to Superior Court seeking a judge's permission to give Hickox a blood test for Ebola, LePage said. "This could be resolved today," the governor said. "She has been exposed and she's not cooperative, so force her to take a test. It's so simple." Medical experts have said that an Ebola test would only be positive if someone were symptomatic, and could register a negative result if the amount of Ebola virus in the blood hadn't reached a detectable level. LePage's office later put out a statement saying negotiations with Hickox had failed and the governor will now "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law." "Maine statutes provide robust authority to the state to use legal measures to address threats to public health," the statement said. It added, "Specifics of the process or steps being taken by the state at this time may not be discussed publicly due to the confidentially requirements in law." The governor said he has a state police car stationed outside Hickox's home and that she has the town "scared to death." ort Kent has a "little rural hospital and if she goes in there she shuts down the whole community," the governor said. Hickox, 33, went on her bike ride after vowing Wednesday night she wasn't willing to "stand here and have my civil rights violated." The nurse, who had been treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone for Doctors Without Borders, said she was fighting for her rights as well as other health care workers who will be returning from the Ebola hot zone in West Africa. She said that Doctors Without Borders told her another 20 health care workers will be coming home in the next month. "Most aid workers who come home just want to see their family and have a sort of normal life," she said Wednesday night. "I'm fighting for something other than myself. There are aid workers coming back every day." Hickox said she isn't committed to a quarantine that isn't "scientifically valid," she said while standing alongside her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, outside her home. The quarantine demand goes beyond guidelines put out by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which indicate that she can't spread Ebola if she isn't sick, doesn't have symptoms and no one is in close contact with her bodily fluids. "You could hug me, you could shake my hand and I would not give you Ebola," she said. HIckox returned to the United States on Oct. 24, landing in Newark Liberty International Airport in New Jersey, where she was questioned and quarantined in an outdoor tent through the weekend despite having no symptoms. Hickox registered a fever on an infrared thermometer at the airport, but an oral thermometer at University Hospital in Newark showed that she had no fever, she said. After twice testing negative for Ebola, Hickox was released and returned home to Maine on Oct. 27. Maine's health commissioner announced that Maine would join the handful of states going beyond federal guidelines and asking that returning Ebola health workers be self quarantined for 21 days. "I will go to court to attain my freedom," Hickox told "Good Morning America" Wednesday. "I have been completely asymptomatic since I've been here. I feel absolutely great." The CDC doesn't consider health workers who treated Ebola patients in West Africa to be at "high risk" for catching Ebola if they were wearing protective gear, according to new guidelines announced this week. Since they have "some risk," the CDC recommends that they undergo monitoring tracking symptoms and body temperature twice a day avoid public transportation and take other precautions. But the CDC doesn't require home quarantines for these workers. Someone isn't contagious until Ebola symptoms appear, according to the CDC. And even then, transmission requires contact with bodily fluids such as blood and vomit. Get real time updates as this story unfolds. To start, just "star" this story in ABC News' phone app. Download ABC News for iPhone here or ABC News for Android here. To be notified about our live weekend digital reports, tap here.
The governor of Maine has vowed to exercise the "full extent" of his authority to quarantine a nurse who treated Ebola patients in Africa. Paul LePage said negotiations with Kaci Hickox, who last week returned from Sierra Leone, over the terms of her isolation had broken down. Meanwhile Ms Hickox, who is free of Ebola symptoms, went for a bike ride. Nearly 5,000 people have died of Ebola, but only nine patients have been treated for the virus on US soil. More than 13,700 people have been infected in total, the vast majority in the West African countries of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. Ebola, which is only spread through close contact with the bodily fluids of a sick patient, has an incubation period of up to 21 days, during which patients neither show symptoms nor are infectious. In other developments US officials are at odds over whether American healthcare workers who return from treating Ebola patients in West Africa should be forced into quarantine. One of these workers, Dr Craig Spencer, travelled around New York City before he fell ill. He is currently in isolation in hospital. After his case was announced, New York, New Jersey and other states ordered the mandatory quarantine of healthcare workers who had been exposed to Ebola patients. But President Barack Obama has warned that overly restrictive measures could discourage volunteering in West Africa. On Thursday, Mr LePage's office said it had hoped Ms Hickox would adhere to all suggested CDC guidelines for healthcare workers at "some risk" of having Ebola. Those include refraining from going out in public except for solo exercise or walks, not going to work, staying off public transport, submitting to direct monitoring, and agreeing to co ordinate travel with public health authorities, among other measures. But the guidelines only recommend daily observation of the person's health by local health authorities, with the other measures suggested depending on the individual case. The governor's office did not disclose what steps it would take to force her compliance, but said, "Maine statutes provide robust authority to the state to use legal measures to address threats to public health". Ebola cases outside West Africa Ms Hickox returned to the US on Friday, landing at Newark International Airport. Officials say she had a minor fever, necessitating a quarantine at a Newark, New Jersey, hospital. Ms Hickox contested the quarantine regimen, ultimately threatening legal action. After showing no fever or other symptoms for a 24 hour period, she was discharged and brought to Maine, where she lives in a house in a rural area. On Thursday morning, Ms Hickox left her home on a bicycle, followed by police officers who monitored her movements and public interactions. She returned home shortly after. Without a court order, the police were barred from detaining her. "There is no legal action against me so I'm free to go on a bike ride in my hometown," she said.
The governor of Maine has vowed to exercise the "full extent" of his authority to quarantine a nurse who treated Ebola patients in Africa. Paul LePage said negotiations with Kaci Hickox, who last week returned from Sierra Leone, over the terms of her isolation had broken down. Meanwhile Ms Hickox, who is free of Ebola symptoms, went for a bike ride. Nearly 5,000 people have died of Ebola, but only nine patients have been treated for the virus on US soil. More than 13,700 people have been sickened in total, the vast majority in the West African countries of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. Ebola, which is only spread through close contact with the bodily fluids of a sick patient, has an incubation period of up to 21 days, during which patients neither show symptoms nor are infectious. US officials are at odds over whether American healthcare workers who return from treating Ebola patients in West Africa should be forced into quarantine until that period has expired. At least six American healthcare workers contracted the illness there. One of those, Dr Craig Spencer, travelled around New York City before he fell ill. He is currently in isolation in hospital. After his case was announced, New York, New Jersey and other states ordered the mandatory quarantine of healthcare workers who had been exposed to Ebola patients. But President Barack Obama has warned that overly restrictive measures imposed upon returning healthcare workers could discourage them from volunteering in Africa. On Thursday, Mr LePage's office said it had hoped Ms Hickox would adhere to its reading of the CDC guidelines for healthcare workers at "some risk" of having Ebola. Those include refraining from going out in public save for solo exercise or walks, staying off public transport, submitting to direct monitoring, and agreeing to co ordinate travel with public health authorities, among other measures. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of healthcare workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," Mr LePage said in a statement. The governor's office did not disclose what steps it would take to force her compliance, but said, "Maine statutes provide robust authority to the state to use legal measures to address threats to public health". Ms Hickox returned to the US on Friday, landing at Newark International Airport. Officials say she had a minor fever, necessitating a quarantine at a Newark, New Jersey, hospital. Ms Hickox contested the quarantine regimen, ultimately threatening legal action. After showing no fever or other symptoms for a 24 hour period, she was discharged and brought to Maine, where she lives in a house in a rural area. Ebola cases outside West Africa On Thursday morning, Ms Hickox left her home on a bicycle, followed by police officers who monitored her movements and public interactions. She returned home shortly after. Without a court order, the police were barred from detaining her. "There is no legal action against me so I'm free to go on a bike ride in my hometown," she said. Meanwhile, US Ambassador to the UN Samantha Power, who has recently returned from a trip to the Ebola hit countries, said the "lives of a whole generation in West Africa" depend on the world's ability to stop the outbreak. "Ebola thrives on fear," Ms Power said. She said it was well known what was needed to stop the outbreak but the world needed to "marshal the will" to do it. While "there are a few nations doing a lot to help, many are doing very little or nothing at all".
In other circumstances, it would just have been a young woman taking a cycle ride with her boyfriend along quiet country lanes through the autumnal splendour of northern Maine. But Kaci Hickox was followed on her foray by two police cars and a posse of journalists as she defied a quarantine request from the state government. Miss Hickox is the nurse who has returned from treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone showing no symptoms of the disease and is refusing to follow a voluntary home quarantine order requested by Maine for the 21 day incubation period. Her stand has earned her withering criticism from some neighbours in the small logging town of Fort Kent and put her at the centre of a political, medical and legal debate about how to handle not just Ebola patients but also US health care volunteers returning from the "hot zones" of West Africa. Following her bike ride, Paul LePage, Maine's Republican governor, said that negotiations "have failed" and he was understood to have asked a judge to impose a mandatory quarantine on public health grounds. Related Articles Ebola nurse leaves house to say she will challenge quarantine 30 Oct 2014 Obama Ebola fight must not be 'guided by fears' 28 Oct 2014 Obama says Ebola 'will be defeated' as second infected nurse released from hospital 28 Oct 2014 Plague Inc. a virtual lesson on Ebola 28 Oct 2014 Miss Hickox, an aid agency volunteer, has said that she will fight any such ruling through the courts and is already represented by two prominent New York civil liberties lawyers. The 33 year old has twice tested negative for Ebola and is monitoring herself for any symptoms of illness, including fever. Medical experts say that it is impossible for anyone to be contagious if they do not have symptoms and even then the disease can only be transmitted at close proximity by bodily fluids. "I am not going to sit around and be bullied by politicians and forced to stay in my home when I am not a risk to the American public," she said. She argued that "stigmatising" and isolating returning health workers would deter their much needed travel to Africa and would only fuel irrational fears about how Ebola spreads. But in Fort Kent, an isolated community near the Canadian border, there is little sympathy for those principles. "It's causing consternation here," said Jim Majka. "It's a simple thing. Stay in quarantine until it's over and she's good." Miss Hickox came to national prominence when she was forcibly quarantined in a medical tent outside a New Jersey hospital after flying in to Newark airport. The state's combative governor Chris Christie reluctantly sanctioned her release after she threatened to sue him. She does seem to have some backing from President Barack Obama. Although he has not spoken about the specifics of her case, he has warned the imposition of overly restrictive measures on returning health workers would undermine American interests by discouraging others from tackling the crisis in Africa. "We know that the best way to protect Americans from Ebola is to stop the outbreak at its source," he said during an appearance with US health workers, some of whom have also returned from the region within the last 21 days. Yet in a further sign of his own administration's schizophrenic response to the crisis, Chuck Hagel, the defence secretary, ordered that all US troops deployed to support the fight against Ebola in Africa must undergo a mandatory 21 day quarantine on their return, even if they have no contact with patients.
Once more defying a state order that she remain quarantined in her house until any danger of her having Ebola has passed, a nurse in Maine recently returned from West Africa took to her bicycle this morning for a brief ride tailed by police officers who were powerless to arrest her. Kaci Hickox, who returned from Sierra Leone where she was volunteering with M decins Sans Fronti res (MSF) one week ago, had threatened to sue the authorities in Maine if they did not lift the quarantine order by the end of today, claiming it was unnecessary and a violation of her civil rights. Ms Hickox, 33, became the first health worker to be detained upon returning to the US under emergency rules put in place by the states of New York and New Jersey. She reacted furiously when she was placed in an isolation tent at a hospital near Newark Airport for three days. She was later allowed to drive to Maine, where authorities insisted she isolate herself at her home. President Barack Obama this week made plain his dismay with the state level quarantine orders, saying that people like Ms Hickox should be treated first as returning heroes. At the same time, the federal government has ordered that US Army soldiers leaving the three West African countries worst affected by the outbreak must themselves be quarantined for 21 days. "It's a beautiful day for a bike ride," Ms Hickox told reporters outside her rural home. She was accompanied by her boyfriend, Theodore Wilbur. She continues to insist she has no symptoms so, according to federal guidelines, cannot represent a health threat. "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based," the nurse told reporters on Wednesday evening after a similar bicycle ride, extending her hand to one to shake hands. "You could hug me. You could shake my hand. I would not give you Ebola," she said. Ms Hickox said that she hoped for a compromise with health officials "I really hope that we can work things out amicably and continue to negotiate." Maine Governor Paul LePage said the state was willing to agree to arrangements that would have allowed Ms Hickox to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from going into public places or coming within 3ft of others. But he said those discussions were seemingly unsuccessful. The arguments surrounding Ms Hickox were consuming the United States just as the rest of the world was trying to focus on what more can be done to combat Ebola at source with the disease killing nearly 5,000 in West Africa. The World Bank said it was releasing another 100m ( 62m) to help send health workers to the region. The bank has now given half a billion dollars towards fighting the disease. After visiting all three countries hit hardest by the disease Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea the US Ambassador to the UN, Samantha Power, said the world was confronting its "worst health crisis ever" and said some countries still had to do more. "We have to dig deeper," she said in Brussels. It's possible the legal fight between the authorities in Maine and Ms Hickox will not be resolved until her putative incubation period of 21 days is over on 10 November. But most legal experts consider it unlikely that Maine would be able to persuade a judge to authorise any arrest order.Among those criticising the state level measures and in particular those put in place by Governor Chris Christie of New Jersey was a freelance NBC cameraman who caught the disease while on assignment and who is healthy again after treatment in Nebraska. "She's earned the right to have a sense of her own safety and her own risk factor to others," Ahoka Mukpo told CNN. "My feeling is... Governor Christie is playing politics right now. It seems to me it's an effort to work with public opinion rather than listen to the advice of the experts."
Kaci Hickox, the Maine nurse at the center of an Ebola quarantine standoff, defied her state's quarantine policy and left her house Thursday morning to go on a bike ride. "There is no legal action against me, so I'm free to go on a bike ride in my hometown," Hickox told reporters. Hickox returned to her home in Maine earlier this week and was supposed to remain under quarantine through Nov. 10. However, the nurse believes she's healthy and symptom free. Maine authorities are pushing legal action to keep Hickox from leaving her home. Hickox made news over the weekend when she was forced into quarantine in New Jersey for three days after she returned from a trip to West Africa. Her outrage spilled out into the public's eye Tuesday and Wednesday when she and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie appeared on NBC's "Today" on consecutive days. On Tuesday, Christie defended his state's policy of a mandatory quarantine. New Jersey and New York have come under heavy criticism for their stance. Hickox insisted Wednesday during an interview on "Today" that she is symptom free and intends to fight Maine's quarantine laws.
Every health worker coming back from West Africa seems pretty fucking douchey about being the one to decide the Hot Zone rules. Kaci Hickox is that Doctors Without Borders nurse who fat governor Christie threw into an E.T. containment tent the minute she got back from Ebola Central and tested positive for a fever. Hickox spent about two seconds in forced quarantine before she started calling her attorney, CNN, and Dr. Nancy Snyderman to grab her some soup and stop by for a visit. Obama and the medical community cautioned everybody about overreacting to Ebola so that they could insidiously import more Ebola. It's some kind of Ebola multi level marketing scheme where they're all getting rich on. Christie told Hickox the only way she was getting out of her Saran Wrap prison in Newark was if she got her attitude and her Ebola risk the fuck out of New Jersey completely. So she did. To Maine, where she was asked by the authorities to home quarantine herself for a couple more weeks to ensure she wasn't infected. Which she did, for about an hour, before taking a bike ride with her friend. Because Ebola nurses are assholes. What all these humanitarian medical workers know is that Ebola is rather difficult to transmit casually and that even if you do flare up, it's like a herpes, they have plenty of time to call their dates and come up with a fake excuse for canceling on dinner. What asshole doctors and nurses don't know is that the rest of us don't give a shit about their science. We don't even want you creating a the appearance of Ebola, or the panic and social cost that surrounds it. It's not irrational to overreact to a virus that makes you shoot diarrhea out of your eye sockets until you die. It is completely selfish not to accept a 21 day quarantine after sticking your hands into Ebola patients in West Africa. Buy some Harry Potter books, get a decent cable package, and shut the fuck up for three weeks. Asshole.
Kaci Hickox, a nurse who is under home quarantine orders in Maine after fighting Ebola in Sierra Leone, followed through on a plan to break that quarantine Thursday and took an hourlong bike ride with her boyfriend. Hickox was followed by a state police cruiser. Hickox maintains that the quarantine makes no sense because she has no symptoms of the disease and has tested negative for it. The story has generated a lot of discussion (more than 100 comments) that reflects both the sense that government should not violate individual rights and that extreme caution should be enforced with a disease as deadly as Ebola. Here are some of the comments from the earlier story. Take our poll and add your comments below. Zora The Soothsayer Good for her. Refusing to be a pawn of the Christies, Cuomos and that wacko LaPage. The hysteria and fear which stupid people seem to embrace so readily is being challenged by Hickox. Maybe there is hope after all. pluckyduck Fine, if this woman wants to demand her 'rights' at the expense of a city population's safety, then she should be held criminally responsible if a single person becomes infected because of her carelessness. Too often, people shove their rights in other people's faces without any responsibility. This country, through the maneuvering of lawyers, has created a morass that demands rights at all costs with no regard to the results of exercising those rights. OreOre Hmm. 3 week quarantine is reasonable. Also, riding her bike in rural Maine has effectively zero transmission risk. The point is to avoid people, not to avoid fresh air. ean I am getting tired of the nanny state big brother government telling people when and where they can go on bike rides. I thought this was America the land of individual liberty and assumed personal responsibility? symasapi The only thing that is concerning is that the doctor in New York was absolutely symptom free for several days before displaying symptoms and testing positive. As a nurse in a hospital, I know we don't always know how diseases are transmitted. We can take all the precautions in the world and still catch things from patients. That's not such a risk when we are talking about flu, pneumonia, etc. But we are talking about a disease with a 70 mortality rate. There needs to be a balance between public safety and civil rights. Polarizing the issue is not the answer. jdmd8910 No cure and about a 50 fatality rate... and she self diagnoses and puts her sense of personal freedom above all. A truly selfish and arrogant tantrum by some one that used to be considered a professional in the health care ... profession. She is right, that a quarantine is not pure science, it is not always based upon medical science... it is based upon social sciences... and the need to prevent both needless infections AND needless fear. Now she has set the argument for anyone to self diagnose and jump quarantine. THANK YOU for that... We had quarantines with polio, with Spanish Influenza, with Typhus...a long list and the people put the security of the whole above what is today the inconvenience of a few weeks paid leave at home. But that was before viruses had the advantage of the Politically Correct whine. sheesh. shakelmakin She chose to go to an Ebola ridden country and surrounded herself with infected people which is commendable but she needs to realize that her inconvenience could prevent a horrible outbreak. I don't think we can be too cautious with people who have been exposed until we know more about the disease. In my opinion she is an attention seeker and really only cares about herself, otherwise she would just shut up and sit out her quarantine quietly. Esther shakelmakin You may not know "more about the disease" but the experts do and it is spread by direct contact with the body fluids of a sick person. Ms Hickox is not sick and thus, cannot spread the disease. We do not take away someone's constitutional rights to allay the fears of ignorant people.
Fox anchor Shepard Smith noticed a pattern between the two governors who have attempted to place a mandatory quarantine on Kaci Hickox They're both attempting to boost their political standing for upcoming elections. Upon returning from West Africa last week, New Jersey's Republican Gov. Chris Christie ("Who is looking at 2016 potentially," Smith noted) attempted to place the Ebola nurse under a mandatory quarantine. After several days in a quarantine tent, Hickox returned to her home in Maine, where that state's Republican Gov. Paul LePage ("Up for re election, and it's tight as can be," said Smith) is pushing for a mandatory quarantine but facing some legal challenges. During Smith's report on the situation, the cameras went into "Shep's Take" mode, slowing zooming in on the anchor as he delivered the following sermon on the matter
According to reports on Thursday, Maine state officials plan to sue the nurse who was treating Ebola patients in West Africa, Kaci Hickox, to force her to be quarantined in her home. Hickox, who had been treating Ebola patients in West Africa, has refused to follow the strict Ebola 21 day quarantine that was put forth by the state of Maine, where she lives. The 21 day quarantine, which was implemented by NY, NJ and other states, were put in place for medical workers who have been treating Ebola patients mostly for medical workers traveling back to the U.S. from Ebola stricken West African countries. According to reports, Hickox first left her home where she was supposed to be quarantined on Wednesday, as she spoke with reporters and even shaking some hands. Hickox then refused the quarantine again as she went on a bike ride with her boyfriend Thursday for about an hour within a town of just 4,300 people. Although a police officer was following Hickox during the bike ride, police aren't able to actually detain her until a judge signs a court order as she is not yet breaking any laws. Hickox already tested negative and showed no signs of having Ebola symptoms, but state officials are still urging her to remain in quarantine until the specified date of Nov. 10. Hickox claims the quarantine is a violation of her rights and that she's not a threat to anyone. She also mentioned that the quarantine measures were put in place based on fear rather than science. "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based," she told reporters on Wednesday.
Compared to the legions of other existential threats that Americans worry about on a daily basis, Kaci Hickox is not an obvious Public Enemy No 1. Rather than being a terrorist, Anthrax poisoner or random gun nut, the 33 year old volunteer with Medecins Sans Frontieres has just come back from a long stint treating Ebola victims in Sierra Leone. With a pretty smile and a luxuriant mane of red hair, she is the very image of the feisty, courageous aid worker, the sort that America's Peace Corps might use to front a recruitment campaign. Since coming back home, however, Ms Hickox, has proved a little feistier than Americans expect their aid workers to be. Already upset at being treated with great suspicion by US immigration officials never the most welcoming people she has threatened to sue New Jersey governor Chris Christie for trying to insist that she endure a mandatory three week quarantine upon her return, which involved residing in a sealed tent at Newark Hospital without a flushing toilet. She was allowed out after testing negative and has since made her way to her home state of Maine, only to find local officials now seeking a judge's permission to get her tested again, lest she still be "incubating". Ms Hickox has been backed by both the Obama administration and disease control experts. They point out that would be Ebola carriers are only infectious once they actually start showing symptoms of the virus, and that until then, there is no real point in sticking them in hermetically sealed tents. But as of yet, common sense has not prevailed. Far from it. On Thursday, irritated at the Maine authorities insisting that she remain under quarantine in her house, she went for a bike ride. With no court order yet in place, Maine police, who have been parked up outside her house, ended up following her in a Benny Hill style chase. Given that Ms Hickox lives in a remote rural corner of the state, the risks here are pretty minimal either way, unless you count the possibility of a pile up involving the huge media pack who have also been following her (most showing no worry about infection). But the case has still polarised America. On one side are the likes of Christie, who say that Ebola is such a serious threat that officials cannot simply rely on a system of voluntary quarantine for aid workers, whereby it is left to them to report themselves sick. And on the other are those who feel it is a shoddy way to treat people who have been out risking their lives to help others. Mr Christie, they believe, would not treat US troops in the same fashion (some 3,000 of whom are currently in or en route to Liberia). I should probably declare a certain bias here, given that I myself have been in Ms Hickox's position. I've been out to Liberia to report on the Ebola crisis twice in the last few months, and on both occasions have found myself having to reassure people when I come back that I am not a public health hazard. As per the standard practice among aid workers, each time I return I inform my local health authority. Their advice is that as long as one is not feeling sick, there is no reason not to continue life as normal. But it isn't always that simple especially if, like me, you are also a parent, dropping children off at school and nursery, where some other parents may take the view of Governor Christie that it's better to be safe than sorry. However, if Britain or anywhere else wants to play a part in stopping Ebola, there is a limit to how cautious we can afford to be. The government is trying to recruit up to 1,500 volunteers from the NHS to help deal with the crisis in Sierra Leone, without which it may well continue spreading into the wider world. Were those volunteers were to be placed in quarantine tents for three weeks when they returned, I can't imagine many people would put their hands up. True, as of yet, the UK has no intention of implementing the measures that New Jersey has done. But we in Britain have not yet had a major Ebola scare, as the US has had already in Texas. Were it to happen here and the chances are it will at some point the government will no doubt come under pressure to follow in Governor Christie's footsteps. There is, however, a wider principle at stake here that everybody should be able to agree on. Which is that when it comes to public health issues, precautions based on sound science should be what counts, not popular panic or politicians anxious about bad headlines. It's about analysis of risks, working out what is sensible and reasonable in comparison to the benefits gained. That's one of the reasons why we in the West have such a good record on public health in the first place, because we don't let irrationality rule the day. If we choose to do so, we put ourselves in the same category as the Liberians and Sierra Leoneans who blame Ebola on witchcraft.
Patrick J. Brennan, an infectious diseases physician, is chief medical officer and senior vice president of the University of Pennsylvania Health System and a former director of tuberculosis control for the Philadelphia Department of Public Health. Distributed by MCT Information Services. ON OCT. 23, Dr. Craig Spencer, an obviously compassionate and responsible young man, recognized the onset of fever during the incubation phase since his last exposure to patients with Ebola in Guinea. He acted quickly to minimize his contact with others, reporting his illness to his sponsoring organization, Doctors without Borders. His subsequent management by New York City authorities was swift and effective. Similarly, two nurses in Dallas closely tracked their temperatures and symptoms following Thomas Eric Duncan's death from Ebola on Oct. 8. When the fever came, they, too, quickly reported the onset of illness and were hospitalized and isolated. Contrast this with the visceral and politically charged reaction of the governors of four states, including Governor Christie's shameful authorization to quarantine nurse Kaci Hickox Oct. 24 after her return from West Africa, where she was treating Ebola patients. Rather than calming fears of contagion, the actions of the governors show a reckless disregard for medical evidence and public health and inflame the discourse on the handling of Ebola. Quarantine in a tent Hickox, who is not ill, was nonetheless held in quarantine in a tent at a New Jersey hospital after her return to the United States. This week she was released and allowed to travel to Maine, where she is expected to self quarantine, although she was spotted taking a short bicycle ride with her boyfriend Thursday morning. Accurate temperature measurements since last week have shown that she has no fever, and laboratory tests have demonstrated that Hickox currently has no evidence of Ebola in her system. But her release came only after speaking out publicly against her quarantine. An unapologetic Christie stands by his decision to quarantine Hickox, which means it could easily happen to others. To order quarantines without a plan or scientific rationale leaves little question about the motivation for these actions, and they have had their desired effect. This needless quarantine did not make New Jersey a safer place. It merely thrust governors into the forefront of a public health issue about which they appear to know little. Should Christie's shortsighted approach become the norm, it is likely that American support for the global effort to contain Ebola will be impeded. That, in turn, will slow containment and worsen the epidemic. At a time of such public concern, America is in little need of aspiring politicians who set public health policy on the fly in defiance of science and civil rights. When threats are posed Public health law permits the incarceration of individuals who pose a threat to society through their negligent actions. Those who harbor illnesses transmissible to others may be legally quarantined when their refusal to receive treatment places others at risk. While I was director of tuberculosis control for Philadelphia in the late 1990s, our office sought and obtained orders for the isolation of people who refused to take treatment, often for highly resistant strains of TB. Their willful avoidance of therapy subjected their children, families and other members of society to possible infection and illness with a serious disease. In such cases, quarantine was warranted and granted by the courts until the threat passed. If an Ebola patient was well enough to refuse isolation and elude treatment, he or she should be treated in a similar fashion. Ebola, sadly, is so profound that patients are often left prostrate and fully dependent on others for sustenance and care. But, prior to the onset of symptoms, they are not contagious. In contrast, what we have seen in the example first of Christie and Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York, and later Govs. Rick Scott of Florida and Pat Quinn of Illinois, is the willful disregard of medical evidence and a violation of civil rights. Happily, reasonable voices seemed to have tempered Cuomo's position. But not so Christie's. Responsible actions In every example to date of a health care worker presenting with Ebola in the United States, the affected person has promptly self reported his or her illness. Furthermore, there has been no evidence of significant exposures to the general public. Health care workers should not be subject to the degrading conditions Hickox received in New Jersey. Health care workers responsible enough to travel overseas to apply their skills, or wade into hot zones in this country, deserve better than the spectacle of incarceration at the whim of ill informed politicians. The capricious policy of quarantine implemented in four states should not be repeated in other jurisdictions and should be reversed where it is in effect before further harm is done to the effort to combat this illness.
Fort Kent (Maine), Oct. 30 A nurse who cared for Ebola patients in Sierra Leone defied Maine officials this morning, leaving her house for a short bicycle ride and setting up a legal fight over a 21 day quarantine. The nurse, Kaci Hickox, left her house on the edge of Fort Kent just after 9am, biking with her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, down a quiet paved road, followed closely by two police cars and a caravan of reporters. The couple rode less than a kilometre, then turned onto a graded gravel trail on a former railroad right of way flanked by pines. One police car, which has been posted outside her house for days, followed slowly behind. Hickox and her boyfriend, wearing jackets in the crisp Maine morning, returned to the house an hour later. It is not clear how Maine officials will respond. State officials said yesterday that they would seek a court order to enforce a 21 day quarantine if Hickox left the house. "While we certainly respect the rights of one individual, we must be vigilant in protecting 1.3 million Mainers, as well as anyone who visits our great state," Governor Paul R. LePage, a Republican, said in a statement yesterday. In Maine and elsewhere, the fight over Ebola was poised to be one of the final defining moments of the midterm elections, with LePage in a close race for re election, along with governors from both parties in other states that have imposed quarantines, including Connecticut, Georgia and Florida. Hickox has said the quarantine is unnecessary and counterproductive. "So many states have started enacting these policies that I think are just completely not evidence based," she said in an interview yesterday. "They don't do a good job of balancing the risks and benefits when thinking about taking away an individual's rights." Norman Siegel, a prominent civil rights lawyer who is representing Hickox, said yesterday that "in our view she is not restricted to do anything". Hickox's defiance put the focus for the next few days on one of the most remote reaches of the country, Fort Kent, a Canadian border town where the nurse shares a home with her boyfriend. If detained by officials, she will have three days to seek a court order to challenge the quarantine. Hickox, 33, returned last Friday from a month treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with the group Doctors Without Borders. She was isolated in a tent at a New Jersey hospital after she registered a low grade fever on a forehead scanner. She had not previously registered a fever and has not since. Hickox has never shown symptoms of the virus and tested negative for it several hours after being quarantined the disease is considered contagious only when a person displays symptoms. She was released on Monday and allowed to travel to Maine after her lawyers threatened New Jersey officials with a legal challenge. In an interview yesterday, Hickox said that the stigmatisation of health workers had "exploded" across the country. She warned that quarantines would ultimately lead to families' being shuttered inside their homes and would deter aid workers from going to West Africa to treat Ebola at its origin. "I understand how fear spreads," she said. "But if I'm a nurse and I have a patient in the hospital, it's our responsibility as medical professionals to advocate for our patients. Now, it's the medical professionals who are being stigmatised. Even if there is popular public opinion, we still have to advocate for what's right." In Louisiana, authorities told participants in an international conference on infectious tropical diseases next week in New Orleans that they should not attend if they had recently been in Liberia, Sierra Leone or Guinea, or had contact with someone infected with the virus. Cuba conference US government officials joined health experts from throughout the Americas at an Ebola conference in Cuba yesterday, the latest show of cooperation between the historic adversaries on fighting the disease. The meeting organised by ALBA, a bloc of Leftist governed countries, aims to coordinate a regional strategy on the prevention and control of Ebola
A US nurse who recently returned from treating Ebola patients in Africa has taken a bike ride despite a state order to stay at home in quarantine. Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend rode their bicycles away from their house in the northeastern state of Maine on Thursday as a gaggle of media looked on and cameras rolled, CNN reported. The pair were wearing bicycle helmets and did not speak to reporters. Two police cars followed them as they rode away. Controversy is raging about measures taken in some US states, such as New Jersey and New York, quarantine individuals returning from treating Ebola infected patients in west Africa. Hickox was kept in an isolation tent for three days after she returned to the United States from Sierra Leone. New Jersey Governor Chris Christie let her go on Monday, and she was driven to Maine. But there the state imposed its own quarantine. Hickox has vowed to fight the state of Maine, which wants to keep her in quarantine for the 12 days that remain of the virus's 21 day incubation period. But Maine said it will seek a court order to keep her at her home if necessary. 'They will not allow me to leave my house and have any interaction with the public, even though I am completely healthy and symptom free,' Hickox said as her boyfriend stood beside her home in the town of Fort Kent late on Wednesday. Hickox said that if the state does go to court to force her to stay isolated until November 10, she will file a challenge, NBC News reported. 'I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based,' the nurse said.
The governor of Maine has vowed to exercise the "full extent" of his authority to quarantine a nurse who treated Ebola patients in Africa. Paul LePage said negotiations with Kaci Hickox, who last week returned from Sierra Leone, over the terms of her isolation had broken down. Meanwhile Ms Hickox, who is free of Ebola symptoms, went for a bike ride. Nearly 5,000 people have died of Ebola, but only nine patients have been treated for the virus on US soil. More than 13,700 people have been infected in total, the vast majority in the West African countries of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. Ebola, which is only spread through close contact with the bodily fluids of a sick patient, has an incubation period of up to 21 days. People are not infectious until they show symptoms, usually a fever. In other developments US officials are at odds over whether American healthcare workers who return from treating Ebola patients in West Africa should be forced into quarantine. One of these workers, Dr Craig Spencer, travelled around New York City before he fell ill. He is currently in isolation in hospital. After his case was announced, New York, New Jersey and other states ordered the mandatory quarantine of healthcare workers who had been exposed to Ebola patients. But President Barack Obama has warned that overly restrictive measures could discourage volunteering in West Africa. On Thursday, Mr LePage's office said it had hoped Ms Hickox would adhere to all suggested CDC guidelines for healthcare workers at "some risk" of having Ebola. Those include refraining from going out in public except for solo exercise or walks, not going to work, staying off public transport, submitting to direct monitoring, and agreeing to co ordinate travel with public health authorities, among other measures. But the guidelines only recommend daily observation of the person's health by local health authorities, with the other measures suggested depending on the individual case. The governor's office did not disclose what steps it would take to force her compliance, but said, "Maine statutes provide robust authority to the state to use legal measures to address threats to public health". Ebola cases outside West Africa Ms Hickox returned to the US on Friday, landing at Newark International Airport and immediately placed in an isolation tent outside a local hospital. After showing no fever or other symptoms for a 24 hour period, she was discharged and brought to Maine, where she lives in a house in a rural area. On Thursday morning, Ms Hickox left her home on a bicycle, followed by police officers who monitored her movements but who are unable to detain her until they have a court order. UN Secretary General Ban Ki moon has condemned the actions of US states ordering medics to be isolated. "Returning health workers are exceptional people who are giving of themselves for humanity," he said. "They should not be subjected to restrictions that are not based on science."
CLEVELAND, Ohio This is a rough sketch of an alternative idea for Tuesday's cartoon on Chris Christie's mandatory quarantine of nurse Kaci Hickox. Sunday, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo announced the state would relax its quarantine guidelines following the controversy over Hickox. Under the state's new mandatory guidelines, health care workers exposed to Ebola patients can stay quarantined at home, instead of at hospital or in a tent. Today, Hickox defied Maine's quarantine order by leaving her home to take a bike ride with her boyfriend. They were followed by state police, who cannot detain her without a court order signed by a Judge. Under the direction of Maine Governor Paul LePage, state officials are seeking a court order to enforce a mandatory 21 day quarantine of Hickox. According to state law, an individual can be quarantined if they are "a clear and immediate public health threat". The problem for the state and the court is that Hickox is not now, nor has she ever been, symptomatic and has consistently tested negative for Ebola. It's hard to see how any court could rule that a healthy person is a "clear and immediate public health threat". The court ruling in the state's favor could pose a clear and immediate threat to civil liberties. It would be like giving public officials the legal authority to incarcerate someone with a clean criminal record if they simply feared they might commit a crime in the future. John Kasich could quarantine Ed FitzGerald because he thinks there might be something wrong with him for not getting a proper driver's license for years. OK, that's a bad example. President Obama would be able to legally quarantine Christie because he appears to be literally a hot head who could pose a public threat to hecklers.
On her Gretawire blog, Van Susteren said she didn't like the way some public officials spoke about Hickox as if she had committed a crime rather than returned from a country where she was helping the sick. She said, however, that Hickox shouldn't "declare war" against New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, who ordered Hickox's quarantine, by defying cautionary health protocol People are afraid and whether that fear is justified or not she should not 'declare war.' She would be smarter to just work this out...and if she loses the quarantine fight? I recommend she just 'throw in the towel' and get some movies and stay home. This is really not worth the fight even if she is right. This is not to say fighting for principal or even for science and medicine is never a good thing I usually think it is but this is just not the time or the one to do it. Nurse Hickox has done great work, made a big sacrifice caring for very sick people and this big fight over a 21 day quarantine is not how she wants to have her great sacrifice remembered. Hickox, who is so far asymptomatic of Ebola and now in Maine, has defied government officials who have called on her to self quarantine. She responded to them by threatening to sue Christie.
The Portland Press Herald reported today that "Ebola Nurse", Kaci Hickox, took a morning bike ride in defiance of the 21 day quarantine request. Hickox is fighting with the state of Maine over the quarantine because she tested negative over the weekend in New Jersey after returning home last Friday from West Africa. However, Maine still wants the nurse to remain under quarantine in the interest of public safety. The office of Governor Paul LePage issued a statement that seems to indicate a compromise on the quarantine. LePage is not opposed to following the recommended guidelines of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The CDC guidelines do not require total isolation but rather monitoring and avoiding crowds and public places. This compromise might not happen as talks with Hickox' lawyers have failed so far. As a result, LePage intends to use the "full authority" of the law to enforce the 21 day quarantine if necessary. Even if a court mandates that Hickox be under quarantine, she will fight the order. ABC News reports, that Hickox is not fighting the quarantine for herself alone. Most aid workers who come home just want to see their family and have a sort of normal life. I'm fighting for something other than myself. There are aid workers coming back every day. According to the CDC, Ebola will not show up positive until the person becomes systematic. Even then, the virus is spread via bodily fluids. However, Maine's Department of Health and Human Services says, "Maine will take further measures, out of an abundance of caution, to ensure public safety. ... We will work collaboratively with the affected individual to establish quarantine of the individual in his or her home for 21 days after the last possible exposure to Ebola." It appears that the quarantine request can be amended to allow more freedom for Hickox. The biggest concern seems to be with her coming into contact with crowds. Which is understandable as locating random people is difficult to do. By limiting her contact with the public, it is easier to track down anyone for testing should Hickox become systematic later. Now Maine and the nation wait to see how this unfolds. Will the state enforce quarantine or will Kaci Hickox be free to live her life as she pleases?
A US nurse has defied orders to remain at home in quarantine after returning from treating patients for Ebola in west Africa. A US nurse who recently returned from treating Ebola patients in Africa has taken a bike ride despite a state order to stay at home in quarantine. Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend rode their bicycles away from their house in the northeastern state of Maine on Thursday as a gaggle of media looked on and cameras rolled, CNN reported. The pair were wearing bicycle helmets and did not speak to reporters. Two police cars followed them as they rode away. Controversy is raging about measures taken in some US states, such as New Jersey and New York, quarantine individuals returning from treating Ebola infected patients in west Africa. Hickox was kept in an isolation tent for three days after she returned to the United States from Sierra Leone. New Jersey Governor Chris Christie let her go on Monday, and she was driven to Maine. But there the state imposed its own quarantine. Hickox has vowed to fight the state of Maine, which wants to keep her in quarantine for the 12 days that remain of the virus's 21 day incubation period. But Maine said it will seek a court order to keep her at her home if necessary. "They will not allow me to leave my house and have any interaction with the public, even though I am completely healthy and symptom free," Hickox said as her boyfriend stood beside her home in the town of Fort Kent late on Wednesday. Hickox said that if the state does go to court to force her to stay isolated until November 10, she will file a challenge, NBC News reported. "I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based," the nurse said.
A US nurse who recently returned from treating Ebola patients in Africa has taken a bike ride despite a state order to stay at home in quarantine. Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend rode their bicycles away from their house in the northeastern state of Maine on Thursday as a gaggle of media looked on and cameras rolled, CNN reported. The pair were wearing bicycle helmets and did not speak to reporters. Two police cars followed them as they rode away. Controversy is raging about measures taken in some US states, such as New Jersey and New York, quarantine individuals returning from treating Ebola infected patients in west Africa. Hickox was kept in an isolation tent for three days after she returned to the United States from Sierra Leone. New Jersey Governor Chris Christie let her go on Monday, and she was driven to Maine. But there the state imposed its own quarantine. Hickox has vowed to fight the state of Maine, which wants to keep her in quarantine for the 12 days that remain of the virus's 21 day incubation period.
Kaci Hickox went bike riding with her boyfriend Thursday morning, defying orders to remain at her Maine home for 21 days. The Doctors Without Borders nurse recently returned from treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone. 24061 CONNECT 397 TWEET 17 LINKEDIN 1041 COMMENTEMAILMORE FORT KENT, Maine Gov. Paul LePage said Thursday that talks with nurse Kaci Hickox had broken down and that he is ready to exercise the "full extent" of his authority to force her to adhere to a 21 day quarantine aimed at Ebola health workers. His remarks came only hours after Hickox defied an existing "voluntary" quarantine order by going for a bike ride with her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur. The pair donned helmets, stepped off the front porch of his rural house around 9 a.m. and rode off on mountain bikes for almost an hour. They were followed by an unmarked state police car and a band of reporters and photographers. "It's a beautiful day for a bike ride," Hickox said as she pedaled away, the Bangor Daily News reports. They returned about an hour later. Without a court order, troopers did not have the authority to restrain her, although they did speak to her briefly upon their return. LePage, who faces a tough re election battle on Tuesday, said the state had been willing to allow Hickox to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from going into public places or coming within 3 feet of others, but that discussions failed. The 33 year old nurse, who recently treated Ebola patients in West Africa, told reporters late Wednesday that day long negotiations could not resolve a deadlock over the quarantine issue. "It is not my intention to put anyone at risk in this community," she said. "We have been negotiating with the state of Maine all day and tried to resolve this amicably, but they will not allow me to leave my house and have any interaction with the public even though I am completely healthy and symptom free." USA TODAY Ebola nurse Kaci Hickox isn't spreading disease like you do Column She told reporters Wednesday night that she had offered a compromise to the state in which she would agree to stay within the Fort Kent area and to travel only by private car, not public transportation. It was not clear from LePage's remarks how far apart the two sides were. "I'd love to be able to go to the Moose Shack in Fort Kent and get an amazing slice of pizza and not be worried about what people are thinking or if I am going to get arrested by state troopers if I walk out of my property," she said. The Doctors Without Borders nurse arrived in Maine on Monday after being forcibly held in an isolation tent in New Jersey for three days under that state's strict new rule for health care workers who have recently treated Ebola patients in West Africa. Hickox was the first person pulled aside at Newark Liberty International Airport on Friday under new regulations after her return from Sierra Leone, one of the West African countries hardest hit by a deadly Ebola outbreak. Nurse Kaci Hickox, right, and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, ride their bikes on a trail near his home Oct. 30 in Fort Kent, Maine. State officials are going to court to keep Hickox, who returned from West Africa recently, in quarantine for the remainder of the 21 day incubation period for Ebola that ends on Nov. 10. (Photo Robert F. Bukaty, AP) Fullscreen Kaci Hickox rides away from a home in Fort Kent. Hickox and her boyfriend were followed by state police who were monitoring her movements and public interactions. (Photo Robert F. Bukaty, AP) Fullscreen Hickox leaves her home as she prepares for a bike ride. (Photo Robert F. Bukaty, AP) Fullscreen State troopers and a television reporter stand across the street from Hickox's home. (Photo Robert F. Bukaty, AP) Fullscreen New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie answers questions from the media about nurse Kaci Hickox's quarantine as Tom Foley, Republican candidate for Connecticut governor, listens Oct. 27 in Groton, Conn. (Photo Jessica Hill, AP) Fullscreen Norman Siegel, a civil rights attorney, meets with quarantined nurse Kaci Hickox at an isolation tent at University Hospital on Oct. 26 in Newark, N.J. Hickox was placed in isolation after flying into Newark Liberty International Airport following her work in West Africa caring for Ebola patients. (Photo Steven Hyman via AP) Fullscreen Hickox sits in an isolation tent at University Hospital in Newark. She is symptom free and was released to her home in Maine. (Photo Steven Hyman via AP) Fullscreen A photograph from the University of Texas at Arlington of nurse Kaci Hickox. (Photo Robert Crosby, University of Texas at Arlington Magazine) Fullscreen An undated photograph of Kaci Hickox. (Photo University of Texas at Arkington via AP) Fullscreen Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries ReplayAutoplayShow ThumbnailsShow CaptionsLast SlideNext Slide Hickox has not displayed symptoms of Ebola and was allowed to leave New Jersey Monday, traveling by private car to Wilbur's home in Fort Kent, a town of just over 4,000 people near the Canadian border. "We have to make decisions on science and I am completely healthy," she said. "You could hug me, you could shake my hand. There is no way I would give you Ebola." Maine health officials have instructed her to remain at the house for 21 days but acknowledge they don't have the authority yet to prevent her from leaving until a judge signs off on a court order. For now, Department of Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew says police, who are parked outside the Fort Kent residence, will monitor Hickox if she leaves the house. Hickox shied away from commenting on LePage's involvement, saying she is "sticking to the science and away from the politics." "I didn't sign up for this," she said. "I flew into Newark airport on the wrong day. This has all been a little overwhelming to me. I think I am fighting for something much more than myself." Hickox said two dozen American health care workers will be returning from West Africa in the next month and "it scares me how they are going to be treated and how they are going to feel." She said she wanted to fight the kind of "stigmatization" once associated with AIDS. Video Keywords public health Doctors Without Borders unmarked car active monitoring West Africa Sierra Leone Africa Nurse Kaci Hickox came out of her home Wednesday night to speak to reporters, saying she'll fight any legal action taken by the state of Maine to force her into a home quarantine. Hickox says she doesn't have any symptoms of the deadly Ebola virus. Video TranscriptAutomatically Generated Transcript (may not be 100 accurate) 00 00 I am completely healthy given you his. Hug me you 00 03 could shake my hand there is no way I would give 00 07 you pull out. With her boyfriend at her side nurse Casey 00 12 hit Cox emerged from her home Wednesday night to speak to 00 15 reporters about her fight with the state of. Maine we have 00 18 been in negotiations. All day with the state of Maine. And 00 22 try to resolve this amicably. But they will not allow me 00 26 to leave my house than at any interaction with the public. 00 30 Even though I am completely healthy and that is very. Hancock 00 33 a Doctors Without Borders nurse who recently returned from Sierra Leone. 00 37 Says she's been informed that Maine's attorney general plans to take 00 40 legal action so they can forced her to stay in her 00 43 home for 21 day quarantine. In the meantime police are stationed 00 47 outside her home in an unmarked car. They're monitoring her movement 00 51 and watched as she spoke to reporters. I don't wants to 00 54 hurt anyone in the public. But I don't think this is 00 57 an acceptable lines. State health care officials disagree staying at home 01 02 for the duration of this 21 day period is not seen. 01 07 Like a burden some request to ask in order to provide 01 13 out of an abundance of caution. A protection to her and 01 17 to the individuals at this state. Cox said she thinks there 01 20 are some middle ground that can be agreed upon. Like travel 01 23 restrictions and what she called direct active monitoring. You have an 01 27 actual public health worker in your state coming to your house 01 30 went to date with the youth and calling it the second 01 33 time. You're taking two pitchers like today. He talks has come 01 36 under fire not only from politicians and government officials but for 01 40 many in the public. On social media she's been called selfish 01 43 and it disgraced our profession. But Hitchcock says it other than 01 47 her profession that she's fighting for she doesn't want them to 01 50 face similar circumstances when they return from treating people in West 01 53 Africa. It scares me to think how there can be treated 01 56 I'm fighting for something much more in myself. Northern Maine Medical Center says Hickox had originally agreed to a 21 day quarantine, according to WLBZ TV. NMMC also said Wilbur had also agreed to a self quarantine for 21 days and will be taking UMaine Fort Kent nursing classes online. There is no word on whether he would abide by quarantine for the full period. Hickox, according to her attorney, had only agreed to remain home for two days after arriving from New Jersey. Kaitlyn Chana reports for WLBZ TV in Bangor.Contributing Associated Press Follow Doug Stanglin on Twitter dstanglin 24061 CONNECT 397 TWEET 17 LINKEDIN 1041 COMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story http usat.ly 1tFqmHo
NERMEEN SHAIKH The World Health Organization says Liberia, the country worst hit by an Ebola epidemic, may be seeing a decline in the spread of the virus. While the number of burials and new admissions has fallen in Liberia, World Health Organization Assistant Director General Dr. Bruce Aylward said the international community must continue to step up its response to the virus that's killed around 5,000 people in West Africa. DR. BRUCE AYLWARD It would be a huge mistake for anybody to think, "Oh, great, we're getting in front of this virus, we can scale back on some of the investments planned." I mean, you know, these are wily viruses. They're waiting for you to make that kind of a mistake. And as you've seen in places, you know, in Guinea, you've seen in Gu ck dou, this thing will go on for a very, very long time at lower rates of transmission. So, you've got to exploit those opportunities as they arise, step up your game. And if anything, this should be really a sign that, look, make those investments because this can be turned around, this virus can be stopped eventually, but it's going to take a very, very aggressive program of work to capitalize on those opportunities. NERMEEN SHAIKH Dr. Bruce Aylward, assistant director general of the World Health Organization. This comes as a debate intensifies in the United States over quarantining healthcare workers who return from West Africa but don't show signs of Ebola. On Wednesday, Maine's governor said that he would seek legal authority to enforce a 21 day home quarantine on Kaci Hickox, a nurse who has tested negative for Ebola after treating patients in Sierra Leone. Hickox made national headlines when she publicly criticized New Jersey Governor Chris Christie for quarantining her in a tent outside the hospital. Hickox said she would challenge Maine's restrictions, just as she did in New Jersey. Last night, Hickox spoke outside her boyfriend's home in Maine. KACI HICKOX I completely understand that the state's purpose is to protect the state of Maine. I have worked in public health for many years, and that has always been my purpose, as well. But we have to make decisions on science. And I am completely healthy. You know, you could hug me, you could shake my hand. There is no way that I would give you Ebola. If I develop symptoms and there's even some evidence that, you know, in the beginning periods there's not enough virus in your blood, that you're shedding virus. It's, you know, still not perfect science, because we don't know everything we need to know about Ebola, because it's a rare enough disease. But, you know, I don't want to hurt anyone in the public, but I don't think this is an acceptable line to be drawn. AMY GOODMAN As Hickox spoke on her boyfriend's doorstep, he had his arm around her the whole time. Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said the state is filing a court order to keep Kaci Hickox isolated at home until November 10th. MARY MAYHEW We will make it mandatory. It is certainly in everyone's best interest to just cooperate and work with us to minimize contact. It is very difficult, outside of that voluntary agreement to stay at home, to monitor someone who may come into contact with many individuals, that if that individual then becomes symptomatic, we will have to work with every single one of those individuals to quarantine those individuals. AMY GOODMAN On Wednesday, President Obama held an event at the White House to honor American doctors, nurses and healthcare workers returning from West Africa. PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA Like our military men and women deploying to West Africa, they do this for no other reason than their own sense of duty, their sense of purpose, their sense of serving a cause greater than themselves. So we need to call them what they are, which is American heroes. They deserve our gratitude. And they deserve to be treated with dignity and with respect. AMY GOODMAN To talk more about the debate over quarantining healthcare workers, we're joined by Lawrence Gostin, university professor and faculty director at the O'Neill Institute for National and Global Health Law at Georgetown University, also the director of the World Health Organization Collaborating Center on Public Health Law. You're one of the leading experts, Dr. Gostin, on the issue of quarantine. This showdown is only getting hotter in this country, and it's not just about this one crusading nurse, Kaci Hickox. But can you talk about what it is she's saying, why she objected to being held in the hospital in New Jersey, and then went home to Maine and was told she had to stay there, why she feels she shouldn't be there for 21 days? LAWRENCE GOSTIN Well, I really don't think she should be there for 21 days. I, like her, believe and I've spent my entire life defending the public's health. And if I actually thought that she or any of the other health workers coming from the region were a risk to the public, I would support a quarantine. But the Supreme Court has said that if you confine somebody who has committed no crime, it's, quote, "a massive deprivation of liberty." It's not a trivial thing. We have to make sure that we balance civil liberties with public health. In this case, all the public health experts are telling us that it's unnecessary the CDC, the World Health Organization. There's no organization that I know of that believes it's right to quarantine for three weeks somebody that really is, as President Obama said, is a hero. They've sacrificed. They've done things that most of us wouldn't do. They've put themselves at risk, gone in a compassionate way. And I do think we need to treat them better than we are. This is self defeating. We think that we're actually decreasing our risk by quarantining her, but actually we're increasing it, because if we impede people from going to the region, then the epidemic there will spin out of control, and that is where our risk lies. NERMEEN SHAIKH Well, I want to turn to comments made by NBC cameraman and Ebola survivor Ashoka Mukpo. He was asked about the mandatory quarantine being imposed on Kaci Hickox. He also talked about Dr. Craig Spencer, who's being treated for Ebola in New York. He was speaking on CNN. Let's just go to a clip. ASHOKA MUKPO She's earned a right to, you know, have a sense of her own safety and her own risk factor to others. And I don't think that Dr. Spencer endangered anyone. My feeling is and, you know, again, I'm not an expert, this is just my own view on the exposure that I've had to Ebola is I think that Governor Christie is playing politics right now. It seems to me that it's an effort to, you know, work with public opinion rather than listen to the advice of the experts. And I just think that it's counterproductive. You know, these are people who have gone and endangered their lives to work with people who have very limited resources and are dying in relatively large numbers. So, to make it more difficult and to treat them as if they're a potential problem as opposed to a public asset, I just think it's a shame, and I don't think it's the right way to act. NERMEEN SHAIKH That was Ebola survivor Ashoka Mukpo speaking on CNN. So, Lawrence Gostin, can you explain why it is people are so fearful? They've have been so critical, many people, of Kaci and of Dr. Craig Spencer, for what they claim was endangering the lives of the public. Could you explain why that's not really been the case? LAWRENCE GOSTIN You know, it really isn't the case. We know from science and epidemiology that if a person is completely symptom free, if they haven't had any known exposure, with their skin or anything else, they have no temperature, and if the health department would proactively monitor them I'm all in favor of that then if they want to get in their car, or if they want to have a walk on the street, they're endangering no one at all. And as I say, from a matter of law, the doctrine of quarantine requires that you have an individual assessment of significant risk. And it doesn't exist here. The CDC itself does not put her in a category that would warrant quarantine. They have guided the states in that way. They've asked the states to behave in a way that comports with science. And unfortunately, we're coming up to elections. Politicians are wanting to follow the polls. They're basing their decisions on fear rather than science. And while sometimes that might be an OK thing to do, not if you're depriving somebody of liberty, and not if you're really making a situation in West Africa worse than it is. AMY GOODMAN Maine Governor LePage is one of the most conservative governors in the country. And his Health and Human Services secretary spoke yesterday. What they didn't explain, they have police outside of the home where Kaci is staying. They have not directly said what they're going to do to her if she goes outside. But if they're saying she's contagious, right the New Jersey governor, Christie, said she's "obviously ill," which was obviously wrong LAWRENCE GOSTIN Clearly wrong. AMY GOODMAN Are they going to be wearing moon suits and tackle her? They will not explain what they're going to do to her. LAWRENCE GOSTIN No, and in fact, unless they've actually issued a formal quarantine order under the state's public health law, the police actually have no authority over her. She has committed no crime. There has been no assessment that she actually, from a scientific point of view, poses any risk to anyone. I don't see that they've got any authority. Now, if they get a court order, they're going to have to convince a judge that their decision is based upon rationality and science. And I don't see how they can do that when the entire scientific community disagrees. And they're just they're fanning the fear in the public. The public are wondering, "Why are we getting all these confusing messages?" The president's saying one thing, the governor's saying another thing, the WHO and CDC have their own position. NERMEEN SHAIKH On Wednesday, Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel announced that all U.S. troops returning from the Ebola zone in West Africa must spend 21 days in quarantine. Let's go to a clip. DEFENSE SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL What I signed this morning was a memorandum to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in response to the memorandum of recommendation I received from the chairman and the chiefs yesterday to go forward with a policy of essentially 21 day incubation for our men and women who would be returning from West Africa. NERMEEN SHAIKH That was Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel speaking on Wednesday. So, Larry Gostin, can you explain the discrepancy in policy? Because on the one hand, the Obama administration seems to be saying that quarantine is not required for health workers, and now we have Chuck Hagel, the defense secretary, saying, but for the military, it is. And presumably healthcare workers are in much closer proximity to those suffering from Ebola in West Africa. LAWRENCE GOSTIN I mean it's a complete contradiction in terms. I was very proud of the United States for sending military troops into West Africa. I actually wish that the military troops could provide direct patient care. But President Obama ruled that out because he didn't want them to be exposed to any risk for political reasons. I can understand that. But now, when they've not had any patient contact they may have had no exposure whatsoever and then come back, and every single one of them will be quarantined 21 days, it defies rationality. Why would you want to do that? The other thing is, is that we have people coming and going to West Africa all the time. We have U.N. diplomats, high level American officials, high level World Bank officials, that will be coming to and from New York City and other places. Do we intend to quarantine them all? AMY GOODMAN to the United Nations, Samantha Power, just went to all three nations that are hardest hit. LAWRENCE GOSTIN Absolutely. AMY GOODMAN She said she'll abide by the law. But this goes even beyond Ebola. I wanted to turn to Steve Hyman, an attorney for the nurse, Kaci Hickox. STEVEN HYMAN There's no basis to arrest her. There's no basis to detain her. And such action would be illegal and unconstitutional. And we would seek to protect Kaci's rights as an American citizen under the Constitution. The fact is, she seems to be doing well. She's now certainly better than she was when she was in the isolation tent, courtesy of Governor Christie, in New Jersey. She is feeling fine hopefully, she stays that way and is monitoring herself, as required by the protocols, and is staying in touch with the Maine public health officials. There is no legal basis under Maine law or under the U.S. Constitution to restrain her because she went to Africa to help people get better. AMY GOODMAN And this is what else Kaci Hickox's attorney, Steve Hyman, had to say. STEVEN HYMAN In the AIDS crisis, they were trying to do the same thing. People were supposed to be isolated because of AIDS and the fear that ran through the community. And that proved to be totally wrong. And people were subjected to the same thing that's happening to Kaci by this hysteria that somehow there's contagion, because of some myth as to how it's transmitted. AMY GOODMAN That's Steve Hyman, an attorney for Kaci Hickox. And I wanted to ask you, Dr. Lawrence Gostin I was just watching a Mount Sinai Hospital doctor, infectious disease doctor, today on television, who was responding to the question, you know, more than 80 percent of Americans want people quarantined, so how do you deal with that? And he said, you know, if you had asked them if they wanted Ryan White, the boy who had AIDS LAWRENCE GOSTIN Yeah. AMY GOODMAN if you wanted him quarantined, not to go to school, they would have said the same thing. That doesn't make it right. How do you deal with this, Dr. Gostin? LAWRENCE GOSTIN Well, I mean, I think you need to deal with it with clear information. I mean, we didn't, in the end, quarantine people with AIDS, thank goodness, but we did harass them, discriminate against them. Ryan White, a poor little young boy who had HIV infection, was embarrassed, kick out of school. These are not humane, compassionate ways of dealing with things. Unfortunately, you know, epidemics, particularly fearful ones, bring the worst out in society and civilization and humanity. But we need to find the better parts of ourselves and treat human beings with compassion, and only restrict them if it's absolutely necessary for the public welfare. And in this case, it clearly is not. NERMEEN SHAIKH Well, on Wednesday, representatives of the Centers for Disease Control joined health officials from 31 other countries from the Americas in Cuba for a conference on Ebola. The meeting was convened by ALBA, a regional alliance of Latin American and Caribbean countries. This is Cuban Health Minister Roberto Morales. DR. ROBERTO MORALES OJEDA translated We hope that this meeting creates a concerted course of action to continue perfecting our national plans, that it ratifies the commitment we have to the most vulnerable people as an expression of the principles of solidarity, genuine cooperation and integration between our countries. NERMEEN SHAIKH The U.S. presence in Cuba is the latest show of cooperation between the two countries on the Ebola crisis. This is Nelson Arboleda of the CDC. DR. NELSON ARBOLEDA translated I think that this is an international emergency and that we must all work together and cooperate in this effort. NERMEEN SHAIKH So, Larry Gostin, according to the World Health Organization, Cuba is by far the largest provider of doctors and healthcare workers to West Africa in dealing with this Ebola crisis. So could you talk about what you think the U.S. ought to be doing more to deal with the crisis there in West Africa? LAWRENCE GOSTIN Yeah, well, before I do that, I mean, one when I just had said that epidemics bring out the worst in us, but here's a case of where epidemics can bring out the best in us, where it can bring us together, which shouldn't be a Democrat Republican issue. It shouldn't be a Cuba American issue. It's a global issue for all of mankind and humankind. What America needs to do is really ramp up the response in West Africa. We need to be training a reserve work core of experienced doctors and nurses, putting them into the region, supporting them, treating them with respect. And we need to be providing money. And more than anything, we need to mobilize the international community. At least the U.S. has troops there. There are a lot of countries that don't. I'm really astounded at the delay and the lack of attention that's been given to what is really one of the worst crises I've seen since the AIDS epidemic. AMY GOODMAN MSF, M decins Sans Fronti res, Doctors Without Borders, is really suffering now. They're saying that LAWRENCE GOSTIN They are. AMY GOODMAN because of this controversy over the quarantining of healthy people, that it means that they are getting less recruits, fewer doctors, nurses, health workers offering to go abroad. President Obama almost had tears in his eyes yesterday as he surrounded himself I think the visual was more important than anything he said, being very close to hugging people who had been in West Africa. What is your what is the single most important thing you feel needs to happen right now as the U.S. focuses on this debate over local quarantine? What's brought Liberia's infection rate down? LAWRENCE GOSTIN Well, you know, first, we have to stop being so insular and just thinking about ourselves and our own we have a few very isolated cases. In West Africa, they will have tens of thousands, maybe even hundreds of thousands, of people with Ebola. So we've got to put it in perspective. And we have to really all come together, as Americans and as an international community, and put our focus in West Africa. You know, if we don't, and for some reason it jumps to another populous city like Delhi or Beijing, then we could have a global catastrophe, something that would really come back to haunt us. So, this is in our self interest, but more than that, it's in our shared humanity, that we really need to focus our attention, resources, human resources and engineering to really build up hospitals, doctors and public health systems. And we have to learn from this lesson. We have to learn what to do in the future. And what that is, is to build the health systems up in low and middle income countries so that these things don't spin out of control. AMY GOODMAN Lawrence Gostin, we want to thank you for being with us, university professor, faculty director of the O'Neill Institute for National and Global Health Law at Georgetown University LAWRENCE GOSTIN Thanks for having me. AMY GOODMAN also director of the World Health Organization Collaborating Center on Public Health Law. Thank you. This is Democracy Now! When we come back, we're going to be looking at the Red Cross, not around the issue of Ebola today, but it's the second anniversary of Superstorm Sandy. "Where were they?" people asked all over the East Coast. We'll look at their own internal documents to find out why they were not present. Stay with us.
Maine officials are seeking court authority to give keep Kaci Hickox indoors after she refused to obey their imposition of a quarantine on her. In the meantime, though, she should stop acting like she's being forced to undergo two weeks of unconstitutional torture. Frankly, in matters Ebola, it's hard to find anyone who makes perfect sense. Hickox the nurse who served a noble tour of duty in Ebola stricken Sierra Leone and gained public sympathy when she was quarantined under unfair and terrible conditions upon her arrival in New Jersey has a good point when she says that the science shows Ebola is not contagious until symptoms appear. She remains without symptoms. At the same time, home in Maine, she is violating quarantine, going out bicycling. Again, she's not going to sicken anyone on a bike. But neither is she entitled to write the rules of her quarantine. Moreover, she has said that she could see her way clear to not coming in close contact with the public for example, she said, she would be willing to agree to steering clear of public transit. But if she is so utterly certain that she would not put the public in danger as long as she monitors her health carefully, why would she agree to that? That's like admitting that Maine health authorities might have a point about what it takes to keep the public safe. It makes sense for state authorities to be flexible about their rules for returning healthcare workers. They might want to treat people who weren't always in protective garb with stronger quarantine rules than those who were, for example. California has the right idea with the rules it announced Wednesday the question will be how smart it will be about actually implementing those rules. Yes, people overrate the danger of major Ebola contagion in this country. But when scientists talk about symptomatic patients, how symptomatic do they have to be? Not all patients get a fever, so what if they're just feeling fatigued which could be brushed off as a natural consequence of the psychologically and physically stressful work of caring for frightened, dying and truly contagious people or a little off? Would they all adhere strictly to rules about staying home at that point and immediately calling authorities? Another issue that has to be taken into account is the tracking and cleaning that's performed on all the places they've been for the 24 hours before they noticed symptoms. There are times when the impact on the many outweighs the impact on the one. The job that Hickox performed was truly admirable, humanitarian, life saving, among the highest kinds of service one can do for others how many of us could honestly say we'd do the same? She doesn't deserve the "It's all about me" backlash that's been directed at her. If it were all about her, she wouldn't have risked herself by going to Sierra Leone in the first place. But having gone there, health workers might return to protocols they find ridiculous in the much healthier and wealthier United States. Confronted with a novel situation, the country has been reacting bumpily to the business of protecting the public without giving in to unwarranted anxiety. In the absence of a coherent strategy at home, though, returned volunteers cannot make up individual quarantine protocols. Many health experts have expressed concern that overly harsh quarantine rules might discourage people from service in Africa. But a public backlash here could also be dangerous to the fight against Ebola. People are increasingly cynical about the assurances of federal health officials who have not shown that they're on top of the situation at home.
Emotional debate pits individual liberty against public safety Nurse Kaci Hickox says it's her right to roam outside her home, but leaders in Maine warn she could be a threat to public welfare. Yes, Hickox recently treated people with Ebola in West Africa, but she has no symptoms of the disease, and has twice tested negative. "To put me in prison is just inhumane," Hickox said about being placed into an involuntary quarantine after she landed last week at the Newark, New Jersey, airport after working in Sierra Leone. "I just feel like fear is winning right now, and when fear wins, everyone loses." New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie disagreed. Citing public safety, officials had Hickox spend more than 65 hours in mandatory quarantine outside a hospital before she was released and transported to her home in Maine. Officials in Maine also disagree with the nurse. Gov. Paul LePage says he will "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law" to keep her away from public places. Tensions are running high. A police cruiser trailed Hickox and her boyfriend as they took an hourlong bicycle ride through rural Maine Thursday a move the governor said was meant to protect the nurse. The showdown between Hickox and Maine officials strikes at a larger dilemma about what health workers ought to do when they return home from fighting the unprecedented Ebola outbreak in Africa, especially when the doctors and nurses show no symptoms of the deadly virus. It's an emotional debate that pits individual liberty against public safety, now elevated to a high public drama because Hickox has been outspoken against a quarantine. "I'm fighting for something much more than myself," she said Wednesday after emerging from the home where she had been staying. "There are so many aid workers coming back. It scares me to think how they're going to be treated and how they're going to feel." Raw emotions Ebola's arrival to U.S. soil this year has caused a visceral reaction among some Americans who advocate quarantines as a prudent vigilance against a disease with no established cure. But medical experts say that reaction is merely fear, and they explain that an individual without the virus' symptoms is no public threat at all. That doesn't satisfy some Americans who demand a higher precaution they want health care workers to be in quarantine for 21 days, the incubation period for the Ebola virus. They cite how Dr. Craig Spencer, 33, a Doctors Without Borders physician, moved freely about New York City for days until he developed Ebola. Spencer just returned from treating Ebola patients in Guinea. New Jersey's 21 day quarantine policy drew sharp criticism from Hickox, who described it as a "knee jerk reaction by politicians to Ebola." Illinois and California announced similar 21 day quarantine orders this week on anyone who has had contact with an Ebola patient in affected areas of West Africa. It's an approach Maine's top health official says she wants the state to take and an idea that one of Hickox's neighbors said he supports. "Why she's being so defiant, I'm not sure," neighbor Jim Majka said, "but it's causing consternation here, and people are trying to ask why she won't honor it. It's a simple thing Stay in the quarantine until it's over, and we're good." President Barack Obama tried to quash that public sentiment this week by inviting to the White House a group of U.S. health workers who worked in African Ebola zones. After being in direct contact with those non symptomatic workers, Obama reiterated how there's no public danger when a health worker doesn't have symptoms of the virus. "We don't react to our fears, but instead, we respond with common sense and skill and courage. That's the best of our history not fear, not hysteria, not misinformation," Obama said. But in a move that seemed to contradict the White House, the Pentagon this week put 30 U.S. soldiers in quarantine or "controlled monitoring" in Italy after they were stationed in Ebola stricken West Africa. High stakes At stake in the quarantine debate is the fight against Ebola itself, advocates say. Specifically, it's the ability of health care workers who fight Ebola at its source to return immediately to their private and professional lives. A 21 day quarantine would discourage this rare pool of labor from taking on such hazardous duty in Africa, advocates say. If there are fewer doctors and nurses on the Ebola front, there's a likelihood that the epidemic in West Africa could spread, experts say. The rights of these health workers once they return home is governed by U.S. guidelines and health laws that ultimately favor states over the federal government. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention now requires greater symptom monitoring of doctors and nurses returning from West Africa, but stops short of requiring any type of quarantine, according to new rules implemented this week. States have the power to exceed those CDC guidelines, and some do. "We have a federal system in this country in which states are given significant authority for governing their constituents. That is certainly true when it comes to public safety and public health," White House spokesman Josh Earnest said this week. "What we believe is important and I think this is a view that is shared by governors and local officials across the country is that these kinds of policies should be driven by science and the best scientific advice that is available." The humanitarian group Doctors Without Borders, for which Hickox worked while in West Africa, condemned "blanket forced quarantine for health care workers returning from Ebola affected countries," the organization said this week. "Such a measure is not based upon established medical science," the group said. The group supports "scientifically grounded monitoring" for homeward bound aid workers, which "is in accordance with the recommendations of public health experts." The virus is spread through the direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infectious person that is, someone who shows symptoms of the virus and with surfaces and materials contaminated with those fluids. People remain infectious as long as their blood and bodily fluids contain the virus, and men can still transmit the virus through breast milk and semen for up to seven weeks after they recover from the disease, the World Health Organization says. Division among supporters To demonstrate how the Hickox case can divide even the most sympathetic supporters, the freelance NBC cameraman who was a former Ebola patient endorsed Hickox's declarations that she has a human and constitutional right to exit her home and roam the outdoors. But would Ashoka Mukpo make that choice himself in the aftermath of his recovery from Ebola? Not entirely, he said. Even though the cameraman is now free of the virus, he recently chose not to visit a Halloween gathering because he didn't want to provoke public anxiety at a jack o' lantern exhibition attended by more 8,000 people. "You know, I just worry about making people uncomfortable. I think I need a couple of weeks out of the hospital where I really can say, look, I've been fine for three weeks," Mukpo told CNN. Mukpo's concern has a precedent When NBC chief medical editor Dr. Nancy Snyderman violated a precautionary 21 day quarantine to reportedly obtain takeout food, she provoked public outrage. That anger was expressed on Snyderman's Facebook page. "It is quite obvious that Snyderman is an arrogant and egotistical woman who has no concern regard for anyone but herself," one man wrote. "I hope this doesn't just 'blow over' in a month and NBC doesn't allow you to return to your position as chief medical correspondent," one woman wrote. Snyderman later apologized for how members of her team, which had visited Ebola infected Liberia, "violated" quarantine guidelines. Court challenge Mary Mayhew, Maine's health commissioner, has said the process to seek a court order imposing a quarantine on Hickox has already begun. It's not entirely clear which side would win that court battle, partly because Ebola is regarded as a menace with no established cure and partly because there's no evidence that Hickox has the disease, let alone a symptom suggesting it, experts say. Under the U.S. Constitution, states have the authority over public health issues, except at international airports and seaports, where the federal government has jurisdiction, said attorney Steven Gravely, who wrote Virginia's quarantine laws. "We quarantine folks who have been exposed to a communicable disease, but who are not yet infected," Gravely said. "The goal is to try to keep people who have been exposed, who may or may not be sick, from infecting other people. And so there's a sound basis for quarantine medically, but there's a lot of debate about whether what New York and New Jersey did was really appropriate." Science vs. politics Hickox's attorneys contend there is no medical evidence that Hickox has any sign of Ebola. She's therefore no threat to society, her attorneys say. Rather, Maine's effort to seek a mandatory quarantine is based on politics, not science, said one of Hickox's attorneys, Normal Siegel. "This should not be directed and led by the politicians. It should be led by the medical community," Siegel said. "The government can't take away your liberty unless there is a compelling basis for it." The absence of any illness in Hickox is among the more salient facets of the expected court case, said CNN legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin said. "Maine has a law, like all states have law, that say people with contagious diseases can be forced in quarantine," Toobin said. "The legal question... is whether her condition, in perfectly good health without symptoms, counts as something that is covered by the law. That is a hard legal question because judges usually defer to public health authorities about their sense of risk. "But here every scientific expert says that people without symptoms are not contagious," Toobin added. "I think this is going to be a very hard legal problem unless her lawyers and the state of Maine can work out some sort of compromise."
Emotional debate pits individual liberty against public safety Nurse Kaci Hickox says it's her right to roam outside her home, but leaders in Maine warn she could be a threat to public welfare. Yes, Hickox recently treated people with Ebola in West Africa, but she has no symptoms of the disease, and has twice tested negative. "To put me in prison is just inhumane," Hickox said about being placed into an involuntary quarantine after she landed last week at the Newark, New Jersey, airport after working in Sierra Leone. "I just feel like fear is winning right now, and when fear wins, everyone loses." New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie disagreed. Citing public safety, officials had Hickox spend more than 65 hours in mandatory quarantine outside a hospital before she was released and transported to her home in Maine. Officials in Maine also disagree with the nurse. Gov. Paul LePage says he will "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law" to keep her away from public places. Tensions are running high. A police cruiser trailed Hickox and her boyfriend as they took an hourlong bicycle ride through rural Maine Thursday a move the governor said was meant to protect the nurse. The showdown between Hickox and Maine officials strikes at a larger dilemma about what health workers ought to do when they return home from fighting the unprecedented Ebola outbreak in Africa, especially when the doctors and nurses show no symptoms of the deadly virus. It's an emotional debate that pits individual liberty against public safety, now elevated to a high public drama because Hickox has been outspoken against a quarantine. "I'm fighting for something much more than myself," she said Wednesday after emerging from the home where she had been staying. "There are so many aid workers coming back. It scares me to think how they're going to be treated and how they're going to feel." Raw emotions Ebola's arrival to U.S. soil this year has caused a visceral reaction among some Americans who advocate quarantines as a prudent vigilance against a disease with no established cure. But medical experts say that reaction is merely fear, and they explain that an individual without the virus' symptoms is no public threat at all. That doesn't satisfy some Americans who demand a higher precaution they want health care workers to be in quarantine for 21 days, the incubation period for the Ebola virus. They cite how Dr. Craig Spencer, 33, a Doctors Without Borders physician, moved freely about New York City for days until he developed Ebola. Spencer just returned from treating Ebola patients in Guinea. New Jersey's 21 day quarantine policy drew sharp criticism from Hickox, who described it as a "knee jerk reaction by politicians to Ebola." Illinois and California announced similar 21 day quarantine orders this week on anyone who has had contact with an Ebola patient in affected areas of West Africa. It's an approach Maine's top health official says she wants the state to take and an idea that one of Hickox's neighbors said he supports. "Why she's being so defiant, I'm not sure," neighbor Jim Majka said, "but it's causing consternation here, and people are trying to ask why she won't honor it. It's a simple thing Stay in the quarantine until it's over, and we're good." President Barack Obama tried to quash that public sentiment this week by inviting to the White House a group of U.S. health workers who worked in African Ebola zones. After being in direct contact with those non symptomatic workers, Obama reiterated how there's no public danger when a health worker doesn't have symptoms of the virus. "We don't react to our fears, but instead, we respond with common sense and skill and courage. That's the best of our history not fear, not hysteria, not misinformation," Obama said. But in a move that seemed to contradict the White House, the Pentagon this week put 30 U.S. soldiers in quarantine or "controlled monitoring" in Italy after they were stationed in Ebola stricken West Africa. High stakes At stake in the quarantine debate is the fight against Ebola itself, advocates say. Specifically, it's the ability of health care workers who fight Ebola at its source to return immediately to their private and professional lives. A 21 day quarantine would discourage this rare pool of labor from taking on such hazardous duty in Africa, advocates say. If there are fewer doctors and nurses on the Ebola front, there's a likelihood that the epidemic in West Africa could spread, experts say. The rights of these health workers once they return home is governed by U.S. guidelines and health laws that ultimately favor states over the federal government.
(CNN) Nurse Kaci Hickox says it's her right to roam outside her home, but leaders in Maine warn she could be a threat to public welfare. Yes, Hickox recently treated people with Ebola in West Africa, but she has no symptoms of the disease, and has twice tested negative. "To put me in prison is just inhumane," Hickox said about being placed into an involuntary quarantine after she landed last week at the Newark, New Jersey, airport after working in Sierra Leone. "I just feel like fear is winning right now, and when fear wins, everyone loses." New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie disagreed. Citing public safety, officials had Hickox spend more than 65 hours in mandatory quarantine outside a hospital before she was released and transported to her home in Maine. Chris Christie on Ebola policy 'We're not moving an inch' Officials in Maine also disagree with the nurse. Gov. Paul LePage says he will "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law" to keep her away from public places. Tensions are running high. A police cruiser trailed Hickox and her boyfriend as they took an hourlong bicycle ride through rural Maine Thursday a move the governor said was meant to protect the nurse. The showdown between Hickox and Maine officials strikes at a larger dilemma about what health workers ought to do when they return home from fighting the unprecedented Ebola outbreak in Africa, especially when the doctors and nurses show no symptoms of the deadly virus. It's an emotional debate that pits individual liberty against public safety, now elevated to a high public drama because Hickox has been outspoken against a quarantine. "I'm fighting for something much more than myself," she said Wednesday after emerging from the home where she had been staying. "There are so many aid workers coming back. It scares me to think how they're going to be treated and how they're going to feel." Raw emotions Ebola's arrival to U.S. soil this year has caused a visceral reaction among some Americans who advocate quarantines as a prudent vigilance against a disease with no established cure. But medical experts say that reaction is merely fear, and they explain that an individual without the virus' symptoms is no public threat at all. That doesn't satisfy some Americans who demand a higher precaution they want health care workers to be in quarantine for 21 days, the incubation period for the Ebola virus. They cite how Dr. Craig Spencer, 33, a Doctors Without Borders physician, moved freely about New York City for days until he developed Ebola. Spencer just returned from treating Ebola patients in Guinea. New Jersey's 21 day quarantine policy drew sharp criticism from Hickox, who described it as a "knee jerk reaction by politicians to Ebola." Illinois and California announced similar 21 day quarantine orders this week on anyone who has had contact with an Ebola patient in affected areas of West Africa. It's an approach Maine's top health official says she wants the state to take and an idea that one of Hickox's neighbors said he supports. "Why she's being so defiant, I'm not sure," neighbor Jim Majka said, "but it's causing consternation here, and people are trying to ask why she won't honor it. It's a simple thing Stay in the quarantine until it's over, and we're good." President Barack Obama tried to quash that public sentiment this week by inviting to the White House a group of U.S. health workers who worked in African Ebola zones. After being in direct contact with those non symptomatic workers, Obama reiterated how there's no public danger when a health worker doesn't have symptoms of the virus. "We don't react to our fears, but instead, we respond with common sense and skill and courage. That's the best of our history not fear, not hysteria, not misinformation," Obama said. But in a move that seemed to contradict the White House, the Pentagon this week put 30 U.S. soldiers in quarantine or "controlled monitoring" in Italy after they were stationed in Ebola stricken West Africa. Army major general speaks to CNN from inside Ebola quarantine High stakes At stake in the quarantine debate is the fight against Ebola itself, advocates say. Specifically, it's the ability of health care workers who fight Ebola at its source to return immediately to their private and professional lives. A 21 day quarantine would discourage this rare pool of labor from taking on such hazardous duty in Africa, advocates say. If there are fewer doctors and nurses on the Ebola front, there's a likelihood that the epidemic in West Africa could spread, experts say. The rights of these health workers once they return home is governed by U.S. guidelines and health laws that ultimately favor states over the federal government. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention now requires greater symptom monitoring of doctors and nurses returning from West Africa, but stops short of requiring any type of quarantine, according to new rules implemented this week. States have the power to exceed those CDC guidelines, and some do. "We have a federal system in this country in which states are given significant authority for governing their constituents. That is certainly true when it comes to public safety and public health," White House spokesman Josh Earnest said this week. "What we believe is important and I think this is a view that is shared by governors and local officials across the country is that these kinds of policies should be driven by science and the best scientific advice that is available." The humanitarian group Doctors Without Borders, for which Hickox worked while in West Africa, condemned "blanket forced quarantine for health care workers returning from Ebola affected countries," the organization said this week. "Such a measure is not based upon established medical science," the group said. The group supports "scientifically grounded monitoring" for homeward bound aid workers, which "is in accordance with the recommendations of public health experts." The virus is spread through the direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infectious person that is, someone who shows symptoms of the virus and with surfaces and materials contaminated with those fluids. People remain infectious as long as their blood and bodily fluids contain the virus, and men can still transmit the virus through breast milk and semen for up to seven weeks after they recover from the disease, the World Health Organization says. To demonstrate how the Hickox case can divide even the most sympathetic supporters, the freelance NBC cameraman who was a former Ebola patient endorsed Hickox's declarations that she has a human and constitutional right to exit her home and roam the outdoors. But would Ashoka Mukpo make that choice himself in the aftermath of his recovery from Ebola? Not entirely, he said. Even though the cameraman is now free of the virus, he recently chose not to visit a Halloween gathering because he didn't want to provoke public anxiety at a jack o' lantern exhibition attended by more 8,000 people. "You know, I just worry about making people uncomfortable. I think I need a couple of weeks out of the hospital where I really can say, look, I've been fine for three weeks," Mukpo told CNN. Ashoka Mukpo Ebola 'more intense than anything' Mukpo's concern has a precedent When NBC chief medical editor Dr. Nancy Snyderman violated a precautionary 21 day quarantine to reportedly obtain takeout food, she provoked public outrage. That anger was expressed on Snyderman's Facebook page. "It is quite obvious that Snyderman is an arrogant and egotistical woman who has no concern regard for anyone but herself," one man wrote. "I hope this doesn't just 'blow over' in a month and NBC doesn't allow you to return to your position as chief medical correspondent," one woman wrote. Snyderman later apologized for how members of her team, which had visited Ebola infected Liberia, "violated" quarantine guidelines. Court challenge Mary Mayhew, Maine's health commissioner, has said the process to seek a court order imposing a quarantine on Hickox has already begun. It's not entirely clear which side would win that court battle, partly because Ebola is regarded as a menace with no established cure and partly because there's no evidence that Hickox has the disease, let alone a symptom suggesting it, experts say. Under the U.S. Constitution, states have the authority over public health issues, except at international airports and seaports, where the federal government has jurisdiction, said attorney Steven Gravely, who wrote Virginia's quarantine laws. "We quarantine folks who have been exposed to a communicable disease, but who are not yet infected," Gravely said. "The goal is to try to keep people who have been exposed, who may or may not be sick, from infecting other people. And so there's a sound basis for quarantine medically, but there's a lot of debate about whether what New York and New Jersey did was really appropriate." Science vs. politics Hickox's attorneys contend there is no medical evidence that Hickox has any sign of Ebola. She's therefore no threat to society, her attorneys say. Rather, Maine's effort to seek a mandatory quarantine is based on politics, not science, said one of Hickox's attorneys, Normal Siegel. "This should not be directed and led by the politicians. It should be led by the medical community," Siegel said. "The government can't take away your liberty unless there is a compelling basis for it." The absence of any illness in Hickox is among the more salient facets of the expected court case, said CNN legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin said. "Maine has a law, like all states have law, that say people with contagious diseases can be forced in quarantine," Toobin said. "The legal question... is whether her condition, in perfectly good health without symptoms, counts as something that is covered by the law. That is a hard legal question because judges usually defer to public health authorities about their sense of risk. "But here every scientific expert says that people without symptoms are not contagious," Toobin added. "I think this is going to be a very hard legal problem unless her lawyers and the state of Maine can work out some sort of compromise." Complete coverage on Ebola CNN's Catherine Shoichet contributed to this report.
Emotional debate pits individual liberty against public safety Photos Courtesy Kaci Hickox Nurse Kaci Hickox says it's her right to roam outside her home, but leaders in Maine warn she could be a threat to public welfare. Yes, Hickox recently treated people with Ebola in West Africa, but she has no symptoms of the disease, and has twice tested negative. "To put me in prison is just inhumane," Hickox said about being placed into an involuntary quarantine after she landed last week at the Newark, New Jersey, airport after working in Sierra Leone. "I just feel like fear is winning right now, and when fear wins, everyone loses." New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie disagreed. Citing public safety, officials had Hickox spend more than 65 hours in mandatory quarantine outside a hospital before she was released and transported to her home in Maine. Officials in Maine also disagree with the nurse. Gov. Paul LePage says he will "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law" to keep her away from public places. Tensions are running high. A police cruiser trailed Hickox and her boyfriend as they took an hourlong bicycle ride through rural Maine Thursday a move the governor said was meant to protect the nurse. The showdown between Hickox and Maine officials strikes at a larger dilemma about what health workers ought to do when they return home from fighting the unprecedented Ebola outbreak in Africa, especially when the doctors and nurses show no symptoms of the deadly virus. It's an emotional debate that pits individual liberty against public safety, now elevated to a high public drama because Hickox has been outspoken against a quarantine. "I'm fighting for something much more than myself," she said Wednesday after emerging from the home where she had been staying. "There are so many aid workers coming back. It scares me to think how they're going to be treated and how they're going to feel." Raw emotions Ebola's arrival to U.S. soil this year has caused a visceral reaction among some Americans who advocate quarantines as a prudent vigilance against a disease with no established cure. But medical experts say that reaction is merely fear, and they explain that an individual without the virus' symptoms is no public threat at all. That doesn't satisfy some Americans who demand a higher precaution they want health care workers to be in quarantine for 21 days, the incubation period for the Ebola virus. They cite how Dr. Craig Spencer, 33, a Doctors Without Borders physician, moved freely about New York City for days until he developed Ebola. Spencer just returned from treating Ebola patients in Guinea. New Jersey's 21 day quarantine policy drew sharp criticism from Hickox, who described it as a "knee jerk reaction by politicians to Ebola." Illinois and California announced similar 21 day quarantine orders this week on anyone who has had contact with an Ebola patient in affected areas of West Africa. It's an approach Maine's top health official says she wants the state to take and an idea that one of Hickox's neighbors said he supports. "Why she's being so defiant, I'm not sure," neighbor Jim Majka said, "but it's causing consternation here, and people are trying to ask why she won't honor it. It's a simple thing Stay in the quarantine until it's over, and we're good." President Barack Obama tried to quash that public sentiment this week by inviting to the White House a group of U.S. health workers who worked in African Ebola zones. After being in direct contact with those non symptomatic workers, Obama reiterated how there's no public danger when a health worker doesn't have symptoms of the virus. "We don't react to our fears, but instead, we respond with common sense and skill and courage. That's the best of our history not fear, not hysteria, not misinformation," Obama said. But in a move that seemed to contradict the White House, the Pentagon this week put 30 U.S. soldiers in quarantine or "controlled monitoring" in Italy after they were stationed in Ebola stricken West Africa. High stakes At stake in the quarantine debate is the fight against Ebola itself, advocates say. Specifically, it's the ability of health care workers who fight Ebola at its source to return immediately to their private and professional lives. A 21 day quarantine would discourage this rare pool of labor from taking on such hazardous duty in Africa, advocates say. If there are fewer doctors and nurses on the Ebola front, there's a likelihood that the epidemic in West Africa could spread, experts say. The rights of these health workers once they return home is governed by U.S. guidelines and health laws that ultimately favor states over the federal government. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention now requires greater symptom monitoring of doctors and nurses returning from West Africa, but stops short of requiring any type of quarantine, according to new rules implemented this week. States have the power to exceed those CDC guidelines, and some do. "We have a federal system in this country in which states are given significant authority for governing their constituents. That is certainly true when it comes to public safety and public health," White House spokesman Josh Earnest said this week. "What we believe is important and I think this is a view that is shared by governors and local officials across the country is that these kinds of policies should be driven by science and the best scientific advice that is available." The humanitarian group Doctors Without Borders, for which Hickox worked while in West Africa, condemned "blanket forced quarantine for health care workers returning from Ebola affected countries," the organization said this week. "Such a measure is not based upon established medical science," the group said. The group supports "scientifically grounded monitoring" for homeward bound aid workers, which "is in accordance with the recommendations of public health experts." The virus is spread through the direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infectious person that is, someone who shows symptoms of the virus and with surfaces and materials contaminated with those fluids. People remain infectious as long as their blood and bodily fluids contain the virus, and men can still transmit the virus through breast milk and semen for up to seven weeks after they recover from the disease, the World Health Organization says. Division among supporters To demonstrate how the Hickox case can divide even the most sympathetic supporters, the freelance NBC cameraman who was a former Ebola patient endorsed Hickox's declarations that she has a human and constitutional right to exit her home and roam the outdoors. But would Ashoka Mukpo make that choice himself in the aftermath of his recovery from Ebola? Not entirely, he said. Even though the cameraman is now free of the virus, he recently chose not to visit a Halloween gathering because he didn't want to provoke public anxiety at a jack o' lantern exhibition attended by more 8,000 people. "You know, I just worry about making people uncomfortable. I think I need a couple of weeks out of the hospital where I really can say, look, I've been fine for three weeks," Mukpo told CNN. Mukpo's concern has a precedent When NBC chief medical editor Dr. Nancy Snyderman violated a precautionary 21 day quarantine to reportedly obtain takeout food, she provoked public outrage. That anger was expressed on Snyderman's Facebook page. "It is quite obvious that Snyderman is an arrogant and egotistical woman who has no concern regard for anyone but herself," one man wrote. "I hope this doesn't just 'blow over' in a month and NBC doesn't allow you to return to your position as chief medical correspondent," one woman wrote. Snyderman later apologized for how members of her team, which had visited Ebola infected Liberia, "violated" quarantine guidelines. Court challenge Mary Mayhew, Maine's health commissioner, has said the process to seek a court order imposing a quarantine on Hickox has already begun. It's not entirely clear which side would win that court battle, partly because Ebola is regarded as a menace with no established cure and partly because there's no evidence that Hickox has the disease, let alone a symptom suggesting it, experts say. Under the U.S. Constitution, states have the authority over public health issues, except at international airports and seaports, where the federal government has jurisdiction, said attorney Steven Gravely, who wrote Virginia's quarantine laws. "We quarantine folks who have been exposed to a communicable disease, but who are not yet infected," Gravely said. "The goal is to try to keep people who have been exposed, who may or may not be sick, from infecting other people. And so there's a sound basis for quarantine medically, but there's a lot of debate about whether what New York and New Jersey did was really appropriate." Science vs. politics Hickox's attorneys contend there is no medical evidence that Hickox has any sign of Ebola. She's therefore no threat to society, her attorneys say. Rather, Maine's effort to seek a mandatory quarantine is based on politics, not science, said one of Hickox's attorneys, Normal Siegel. "This should not be directed and led by the politicians. It should be led by the medical community," Siegel said. "The government can't take away your liberty unless there is a compelling basis for it." The absence of any illness in Hickox is among the more salient facets of the expected court case, said CNN legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin said. "Maine has a law, like all states have law, that say people with contagious diseases can be forced in quarantine," Toobin said. "The legal question... is whether her condition, in perfectly good health without symptoms, counts as something that is covered by the law. That is a hard legal question because judges usually defer to public health authorities about their sense of risk. "But here every scientific expert says that people without symptoms are not contagious," Toobin added. "I think this is going to be a very hard legal problem unless her lawyers and the state of Maine can work out some sort of compromise." Recommended
(CNN) Nurse Kaci Hickox says it's her right to roam outside her home, but leaders in Maine warn she could be a threat to public welfare. Yes, Hickox recently treated people with Ebola in West Africa, but she has no symptoms of the disease, and has twice tested negative. "To put me in prison is just inhumane," Hickox said about being placed into an involuntary quarantine after she landed last week at the Newark, New Jersey, airport after working in Sierra Leone. "I just feel like fear is winning right now, and when fear wins, everyone loses." New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie disagreed. Citing public safety, officials had Hickox spend more than 65 hours in mandatory quarantine outside a hospital before she was released and transported to her home in Maine. Chris Christie on Ebola policy 'We're not moving an inch' Officials in Maine also disagree with the nurse. Gov. Paul LePage says he will "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law" to keep her away from public places. Tensions are running high. A police cruiser trailed Hickox and her boyfriend as they took an hourlong bicycle ride through rural Maine Thursday a move the governor said was meant to protect the nurse. The showdown between Hickox and Maine officials strikes at a larger dilemma about what health workers ought to do when they return home from fighting the unprecedented Ebola outbreak in Africa, especially when the doctors and nurses show no symptoms of the deadly virus. It's an emotional debate that pits individual liberty against public safety, now elevated to a high public drama because Hickox has been outspoken against a quarantine. "I'm fighting for something much more than myself," she said Wednesday after emerging from the home where she had been staying. "There are so many aid workers coming back. It scares me to think how they're going to be treated and how they're going to feel." Raw emotions Ebola's arrival to U.S. soil this year has caused a visceral reaction among some Americans who advocate quarantines as a prudent vigilance against a disease with no established cure. But medical experts say that reaction is merely fear, and they explain that an individual without the virus' symptoms is no public threat at all. That doesn't satisfy some Americans who demand a higher precaution they want health care workers to be in quarantine for 21 days, the incubation period for the Ebola virus. They cite how Dr. Craig Spencer, 33, a Doctors Without Borders physician, moved freely about New York City for days until he developed Ebola. Spencer just returned from treating Ebola patients in Guinea. New Jersey's 21 day quarantine policy drew sharp criticism from Hickox, who described it as a "knee jerk reaction by politicians to Ebola." Illinois and California announced similar 21 day quarantine orders this week on anyone who has had contact with an Ebola patient in affected areas of West Africa. It's an approach Maine's top health official says she wants the state to take and an idea that one of Hickox's neighbors said he supports. "Why she's being so defiant, I'm not sure," neighbor Jim Majka said, "but it's causing consternation here, and people are trying to ask why she won't honor it. It's a simple thing Stay in the quarantine until it's over, and we're good." President Barack Obama tried to quash that public sentiment this week by inviting to the White House a group of U.S. health workers who worked in African Ebola zones. After being in direct contact with those non symptomatic workers, Obama reiterated how there's no public danger when a health worker doesn't have symptoms of the virus. "We don't react to our fears, but instead, we respond with common sense and skill and courage. That's the best of our history not fear, not hysteria, not misinformation," Obama said. But in a move that seemed to contradict the White House, the Pentagon this week put 30 U.S. soldiers in quarantine or "controlled monitoring" in Italy after they were stationed in Ebola stricken West Africa. Army major general speaks to CNN from inside Ebola quarantine High stakes At stake in the quarantine debate is the fight against Ebola itself, advocates say. Specifically, it's the ability of health care workers who fight Ebola at its source to return immediately to their private and professional lives. A 21 day quarantine would discourage this rare pool of labor from taking on such hazardous duty in Africa, advocates say. If there are fewer doctors and nurses on the Ebola front, there's a likelihood that the epidemic in West Africa could spread, experts say. The rights of these health workers once they return home is governed by U.S. guidelines and health laws that ultimately favor states over the federal government. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention now requires greater symptom monitoring of doctors and nurses returning from West Africa, but stops short of requiring any type of quarantine, according to new rules implemented this week. States have the power to exceed those CDC guidelines, and some do. "We have a federal system in this country in which states are given significant authority for governing their constituents. That is certainly true when it comes to public safety and public health," White House spokesman Josh Earnest said this week. "What we believe is important and I think this is a view that is shared by governors and local officials across the country is that these kinds of policies should be driven by science and the best scientific advice that is available." The humanitarian group Doctors Without Borders, for which Hickox worked while in West Africa, condemned "blanket forced quarantine for health care workers returning from Ebola affected countries," the organization said this week. "Such a measure is not based upon established medical science," the group said. The group supports "scientifically grounded monitoring" for homeward bound aid workers, which "is in accordance with the recommendations of public health experts." The virus is spread through the direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infectious person that is, someone who shows symptoms of the virus and with surfaces and materials contaminated with those fluids. People remain infectious as long as their blood and bodily fluids contain the virus, and men can still transmit the virus through breast milk and semen for up to seven weeks after they recover from the disease, the World Health Organization says. To demonstrate how the Hickox case can divide even the most sympathetic supporters, the freelance NBC cameraman who was a former Ebola patient endorsed Hickox's declarations that she has a human and constitutional right to exit her home and roam the outdoors. But would Ashoka Mukpo make that choice himself in the aftermath of his recovery from Ebola? Not entirely, he said. Even though the cameraman is now free of the virus, he recently chose not to visit a Halloween gathering because he didn't want to provoke public anxiety at a jack o' lantern exhibition attended by more 8,000 people. "You know, I just worry about making people uncomfortable. I think I need a couple of weeks out of the hospital where I really can say, look, I've been fine for three weeks," Mukpo told CNN. Ashoka Mukpo Ebola 'more intense than anything' Mukpo's concern has a precedent When NBC chief medical editor Dr. Nancy Snyderman violated a precautionary 21 day quarantine to reportedly obtain takeout food, she provoked public outrage. That anger was expressed on Snyderman's Facebook page. "It is quite obvious that Snyderman is an arrogant and egotistical woman who has no concern regard for anyone but herself," one man wrote. "I hope this doesn't just 'blow over' in a month and NBC doesn't allow you to return to your position as chief medical correspondent," one woman wrote. Snyderman later apologized for how members of her team, which had visited Ebola infected Liberia, "violated" quarantine guidelines. Court challenge Mary Mayhew, Maine's health commissioner, has said the process to seek a court order imposing a quarantine on Hickox has already begun. It's not entirely clear which side would win that court battle, partly because Ebola is regarded as a menace with no established cure and partly because there's no evidence that Hickox has the disease, let alone a symptom suggesting it, experts say. Under the U.S. Constitution, states have the authority over public health issues, except at international airports and seaports, where the federal government has jurisdiction, said attorney Steven Gravely, who wrote Virginia's quarantine laws. "We quarantine folks who have been exposed to a communicable disease, but who are not yet infected," Gravely said. "The goal is to try to keep people who have been exposed, who may or may not be sick, from infecting other people. And so there's a sound basis for quarantine medically, but there's a lot of debate about whether what New York and New Jersey did was really appropriate." Science vs. politics Hickox's attorneys contend there is no medical evidence that Hickox has any sign of Ebola. She's therefore no threat to society, her attorneys say. Rather, Maine's effort to seek a mandatory quarantine is based on politics, not science, said one of Hickox's attorneys, Normal Siegel. "This should not be directed and led by the politicians. It should be led by the medical community," Siegel said. "The government can't take away your liberty unless there is a compelling basis for it." The absence of any illness in Hickox is among the more salient facets of the expected court case, said CNN legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin said. "Maine has a law, like all states have law, that say people with contagious diseases can be forced in quarantine," Toobin said. "The legal question... is whether her condition, in perfectly good health without symptoms, counts as something that is covered by the law. That is a hard legal question because judges usually defer to public health authorities about their sense of risk. "But here every scientific expert says that people without symptoms are not contagious," Toobin added. "I think this is going to be a very hard legal problem unless her lawyers and the state of Maine can work out some sort of compromise." Complete coverage on Ebola CNN's Catherine E. Shoichet contributed to this report.
Asymptomatic Kaci Hickox, who last week blasted her forced quarantine in New Jersey after returning from working in Sierra Leone, defiantly took a bike ride with her boyfriend in Maine where she's vacationing. State troopers tailed the pair, but didn't stop them. Officials want Hickox to maintain a voluntary quarantine in the home where she's staying. But state governor Paul LePage said officials would drop the quarantine requirement if Hickox submits to a blood test. "She has been exposed and she's not cooperative, so force her to take a test. It's so simple," said LePage. "I remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of healthcare workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he added. But a statement issued by his office warned that Maine laws provide "robust authority ... to address threats to public health." Hickox has said that a quarantine isn't necessary because she isn't sick and has already tested negative for the Ebola virus. She'll continue to test negative unless she develops symptoms, according to health experts. Hickox is planning her own court action against New Jersey, where she was ordered to stay in a quarantine tent at Newark hospital without a flush toilet or shower when she flew back from Africa. After pressure from the White House challenging the medical wisdom of such a restriction, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie said she could spend the rest of her quarantine at home.
Hickox isn't backing away from challenging the home quarantine that's been forced on her in Maine. Meanwhile, Gov. Cuomo won't reveal the number of health care workers who have been subjected to the policy upon their arrival from West Africa. Civil rights lawyer Norman Siegel has defended countless victims of government abuse over the years, including people swept up in another hysterical call for health quarantines during the early days of the AIDS epidemic. But even the grizzled Siegel has been struck by the bravery and eloquence of Kaci Hickox, the 33 year old nurse who telephoned him Saturday from a makeshift tent on the grounds of a New Jersey hospital to seek his legal help. "She's terrific, and she knows exactly what her rights are and she explains it all clearly," Siegel said after visiting Hickox Sunday at the isolation unit where she'd been confined by Gov. Chris Christie. Hickox was refusing to submit to a mandatory 21 day quarantine first decreed on Friday by Christie and our own Gov. Cuomo for all health care workers returning from West Africa through Port Authority airports. After risking her life with the group Doctors Without Borders to treat Ebola patients in Guinea, the last thing Hickox expected when she landed at Newark Airport was to be "treated like a criminal" in her own country, she said. Doctors Without Borders, after all, has more experience fighting Ebola than any government or organization. The group's leadership immediately objected to the "blanket forced quarantine," saying "such a measure is not based upon established medical science." The most respected medical publication in the country, the New England Journal of Medicine, called the policy "unfair and unwise" and warned it would dissuade health workers from volunteering to fight the Ebola epidemic in Africa. "The governors' action is like driving a carpet tack with a sledgehammer It gets the job done but overall is more destructive than beneficial," the medical journal said. As for the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, it keeps urging monitoring measures that don't include quarantines for people who show no symptoms of illness. None of this mattered to "Sit Down and Shut Up" Christie, though he avoided a legal suit by Siegel by allowing Hickox to travel home to Maine. Cuomo seems a bit more sympathetic. The 21 day quarantine could be served at home, Cuomo said Sunday, but it would still be mandatory. "You better be home when they (health officials) come (to check)," Cuomo said. "If you're not home, then you violated the quarantine." Some 30 health workers a day are arriving at Kennedy Airport from West Africa, Cuomo told The News earlier this week, so the number facing mandatory home quarantine could grow rapidly. His office did not respond, however, to repeated requests from The News seeking the number of returning health care workers who have already been subjected to the governor's policy. Gov. Cuomo, how many people have been quarantined? Meanwhile, other governors have taken to ignoring the science and making up their own quarantine rules. They include Paul LePage, the Republican governor in Hickox's home state of Maine who is facing a desperate fight for reelection on Tuesday. LePage keeps trying to keep Hickox quarantined in the home she shares there with her boyfriend. The couple responded by taking a one mile bike ride Thursday morning. They chose the bike ride, Siegel said, because they could challenge the quarantine without upsetting local residents by entering some public spot. LePage threatened to go to court to enforce his quarantine. Hickox welcomes the chance to have any of these governors LePage, Christie or Cuomo explain why they're taking away rights of medical workers trying to fight the Ebola epidemic. "You can't give the government the power to violate the Constitution for a minute, let alone 21 days," said Siegel, the lawyer who has seen this movie before. Related Stories Maine governor to use 'full authority' against defiant Ebola nurse NY doctors who help fight Ebola to be treated like reservists
A Spanish nurse who treate d anEbola victim in Madrid has become the first person to have caught the virus within Europe, Spanish media has reported. The infected woman was reported Monday to be one of several nurses who attended to Spanish priest Manuel Garcia Viejo, who, together with another missionary, had been brought to Spain from Sierra Leone on September 22 after contracting the virus. Two tests conducted on the nurse since Monday morning both proved positive, according to media sources within the country's health ministry. Ebola a contagious disease for which there is no known cure has killed about 3,400 people in West Africa in recent months, according to the latest figures from the World Health Organization. Symptoms of the disease include a fever higher reaching up to 38 degrees centigrade, headache, nausea and diarrhea or abdominal pain. Victims take up to 21 days to show symptoms and infect the host, but the virus cannot be transmitted before the host becomes ill.
Madrid A Spanish nurse, who treated a man infected with Ebola in Madrid, has tested positive for the virus. The nurse, who is receiving treatment in the Alcorcon Hospital just outside of Madrid, was part of the team that treated Ebola positive Spanish missionary, Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died Sep 25 in the Carlos III hospital in the north of Madrid, Xinhua reported. The nurse was admitted to the Alcorcon hospital Monday morning with possible symptoms of Ebola, which she had experienced since Sep 30. It was also confirmed that the patient had been in contact with Viejo on two occasions at Carlos III and had been on holiday since his death. She was put into isolation and submitted to the appropriate tests which confirm her infection with the virus. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato said Spaniards "can be certain that we are taking measures to ensure the best treatment for the person infected, as well as the safety of those looking after her and all Spanish citizens". "We will put all measures at the health authorities' to deal with this problem," said Mato, who added she wanted to "send a message of calm to all citizens of this country, we have magnificent professionals to deal with this illness". Meanwhile health service unions, who had warned that Carlos III was unsuitable for the treatment of patients with a disease such as Ebola, have asked for the resignation of Rafael Perez Santamaria, the director of the hospital.
In a case underscoring the risks of caring for Ebola patients, a nurse in Spain has come down with the disease the first time the virus has spread outside West Africa during the current epidemic. Bloomberg's Sam Fazeli has suggested that the spread of Ebola will not become like a virulent flu epidemic, as the disease is not air borne, but rather requires the transmition of body fluids to spread. The unprecedented Ebola outbreak this year has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, and become an escalating concern to the rest of the world. It has taken an especially devastating toll on health care workers, sickening or killing more than 370 in the hardest hit countries of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone places that already were short on doctors and nurses. The Spanish nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old Spanish priest Manuel Garcia Viejo who died in a Madrid hospital late last month, Spain's health minister said on Monday. The sick priest had been flown home from his post in Sierra Leone the nurse is believed to have contracted the virus from him. She went to a Madrid hospital with a fever on Sunday, 10 days after the priest died, and was placed in isolation. She was transferred early Tuesday to Madrid's Carlos III hospital, where the priest and a second missionary priest sick with Ebola were cared for until they died. Related Articles Spanish nurse first to contract Ebola in Europe 06 Oct 2014 British American contracted Ebola 'cleaning infected car' 06 Oct 2014 Five diseases deadlier than Ebola found in the US 03 Oct 2014 Five blunders US made in treating country's first Ebola patient 03 Oct 2014 Nurse diagnosed with Ebola in Madrid 07 Oct 2014 The World Health Organization confirmed there has not been a previous transmission outside West Africa in the current outbreak.
In a case underscoring the perils of caring for Ebola patients, a nurse in Spain has come down with the disease the first time the virus has spread outside West Africa during the current epidemic. The nurse's illness illustrates the danger that health care workers face not only in poorly equipped West African clinics, but also in the more sophisticated medical centers of Europe and the United States, said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease expert at Vanderbilt University. "At greatest risk in all Ebola outbreaks are health care workers," he said. The development came on Monday as another American sick with the disease arrived back in the US for treatment and President Barack Obama said the government was considering ordering more careful screening of airline passengers travelling from the outbreak region. The unprecedented Ebola outbreak this year has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, and become an escalating concern to the rest of the world. It has taken an especially devastating toll on health care workers, sickening or killing more than 370 in the hardest hit countries of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone places that already were short on doctors and nurses. Related Articles Spanish nurse first to contract Ebola in Europe 06 Oct 2014 British American contracted Ebola 'cleaning infected car' 06 Oct 2014 Five diseases deadlier than Ebola found in the US 03 Oct 2014 Five blunders US made in treating country's first Ebola patient 03 Oct 2014 The Spanish nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old Spanish priest Manuel Garcia Viejo who died in a Madrid hospital late last month, Spain's health minister said on Monday. The sick priest had been flown home from his post in Sierra Leone the nurse is believed to have contracted the virus from him. She went to a Madrid hospital with a fever on Sunday, 10 days after the priest died, and was placed in isolation. She was transferred early Tuesday to Madrid's Carlos III hospital, where the priest and a second missionary priest sick with Ebola were cared for until they died. The World Health Organization confirmed there has not been a previous transmission outside West Africa in the current outbreak.
Investigations are continuing after a Spanish nurse who treated an Ebola victim in Madrid has tested positive for the deadly disease. Health officials from Madrid Hospital confirmed the case today, saying the nurse had become sick on September 30. According to BBC, she was part of the team which treated Spanish priest Manuel Garcia Viejo who died of the disease on September 25. She is the first person to have contracted the disease outside of Africa. Spanish health officials say they are looking for those who may have come in contact with the nurse. Meanwhile the BBC reports, US President Barack Obama has announced plans to screen passengers flying to the United States. Over 3000 people have died in the outbreak mostly in West Africa.
It seems like the Ebola virus is slowly finding it's way into the various western countries. A Spanish nurse has tested positive for Ebola weeks after she treated a patient who eventually died of the disease, in what may be the first case of virus' transmission outside Western Africa. Ana Mato, Spain's health minister, said the nurse was part of a medical team that treated Manuel Garcia Viejo, a 69 year old Spanish priest who died last month in Spain after contracting the virus while working in Sierra Leone. "Two tests were done and the two were positive," a spokesman for the health department of Madrid told the AFP news agency on Monday. The nurse was now in isolation in a hospital on the outskirts of Madrid. Journalist Miguel Anxo reported that the most of the health minister's press conference on Monday was decoted "to trying to calm fears that the disease will spread." According to Anxo, although the nurse interacted with people freely before being aware of having the disease, "doctors have been clear that until you show symptoms of Ebola, it is supposed not to be contagious, and therefore the authorities are hoping the virus have not spread due to the short span of time since she has displayed symptoms." The Ebola outbreak in West Africa has killed at least 3,439 people since it began in March, out of nearly 7,500 confirmed, probable and suspected cases. Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea are the worst hit countries. Meanwhile, the US administration said it is not considering a ban on travelers from countries most affected by the virus. "A travel ban is not something that we're currently considering," said Josh Earnest, a White House spokesman. "We feel good about the measures that are already in place." Five US citizens have contracted the disease, four of whom contracted the disease while working in West Africa. The fifth was diagnosed with the disease in the US although it is unclear where the patient contracted the disease
Investigations are under way after a Spanish nurse became the first person to contract Ebola outside west Africa. Medical teams wearing protective clothing transferred the nurse between hospitals in Madrid under police escort early on Tuesday. At a press conference in Madrid health officials confirm that people who had contact with her are being monitored for symptoms. The woman was part of a medical team that treated two Spanish missionaries who died of Ebola shortly after they left Africa
Spain is urgently compiling a list of people who had contact with the nurse who became the first case of an Ebola infection outside Africa when she was diagnosed in Madrid yesterday. The government is taking action to keep doctors and staff safe at Hospital Carlos III, and is investigating how the woman became infected, Health Minister Ana Mato said at a news conference yesterday. The nurse treated Manuel Garcia, a priest who died of Ebola last month, at the hospital. Her husband and thirty medical workers are being monitored, officials said. The diagnosis adds a new dimension to the outbreak, which has killed more than 3,400 people, mostly in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. A man is hospitalized with Ebola in Dallas after traveling there from the Liberian capital Monrovia, the first time the virus has been inadvertently carried out of Africa in the almost 40 years since it was discovered. The Ebola Scourge "The concern in European hospitals where there's good infection control is minimal," David Heymann, professor of infectious diseases at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, said in a telephone interview. "It may spread to a few people at the start, but it shouldn't go further. I don't anticipate any major outbreaks in Europe." Patient Contact The European Union has asked Spain to explain what happened in the nurse's case, Frederic Vincent, spokesman for EU Health Commissioner Tonio Borg, said by telephone. The European Commission will hold a conference call tomorrow on the case with the 28 EU governments, plus Norway, Switzerland, the World Health Organization and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Vincent said. Related Ebola Patient Fights for Life as Contacts are Monitored Ebola Screening at U.S. Airports Under Consideration Opinion Containing Ebola, and Ebola Panic Work to identify the nurse's contacts is "continuous" and "intensive" and is being conducted following World Health Organization recommendations, Spanish public health director Mercedes Vinuesa Sebastian told lawmakers in Madrid today. The nurse went on vacation after treating the priest, with whom she was in contact twice, once before and once after his death, Vinuesa Sebastian said. Stocks of Spanish hotel operators fell in Madrid. NH Hotel Group SA fell as much as 4.8 percent and Melia Hotels International SA fell as much as 3.3 percent. Stable Condition The nurse had been in contact with other people and those people would have to be followed, Fernando Simon, coordinator of the center of alerts and emergencies at Spain's health ministry, told Cadena Ser radio today. The virus is spread through direct contact with bodily fluids from an infected person. The nurse was previously treated in Alcorcon Hospital, on the outskirts of Madrid, before being transferred to Carlos III "We can't put a blindfold on," Simon said, according to comments published by Ser on its website today. "The possibility of contagion exists it's low, but it exists." The nurse is in stable condition, and her life isn't at risk at the moment, Simon said. It may have been possible to isolate the patient on Sept. 30 when she showed her first symptoms, Simon said. Her husband is in isolation, in good health and "relatively calm," he said. "In the case of a person under monitoring, perhaps an isolation protocol should have been applied," Simon said. Madrid health officials will have have a full list ready today of the people that the nurse had contact with, Simon told Ser, adding that it could include 20 or 30 health workers. Missionary Doctor "If this spreads and we have another case, I'm out of Madrid," said Jose Dominguez, a taxi driver in the capital. "I have an apartment on the coast, and I'll drive there with my wife and daughter until this blows over. I'll bring 600 cans of food." Aid workers who have fallen ill in Africa have been evacuated to Spain, France, Germany, the U.S. and Norway for treatment, raising concern that secondary infections will occur in those countries. Garcia, a missionary doctor, died at Carlos III hospital on Sept. 25 after being repatriated from Sierra Leone. Miguel Pajares, the priest who contracted the illness in Liberia, died at the hospital in August. Nursing unions in Madrid called on the government to reassure patients and staff and carry out investigations as quickly as possible to find out how the infection occurred. "We demand all the information so that the general public and nursing professionals can be assured of their safety," said Juan Carlos Mejia, secretary of union action at the Madrid branch of the nursing union SATSE. For Related News and Information Fujifilm Jumps as Ebola Patient Given Drug Leaves Hospital (2)
An investigation was under way today to establish how a Spanish nurse became the first person to contract Ebola outside Africa, after caring for two priests who later died from the disease. Health chiefs in Madrid were under pressure to explain whether failures in protective equipment or infection control were responsible for allowing the virus to pass to the unnamed 44 year old woman. Her husband has been placed in quarantine. Spain's health minister Ana Mato, who faced calls to resign, said "We are working in a coordinated way to give the patient the best medical attention and guarantee the security of the health professionals looking after her as well as the rest of the population. "Be certain that we are taking each and every measure necessary. We are working on discovering what the source of the infection has been and whether all the protocols put in place were strictly adhered to." The auxiliary nurse was one of about 30 staff at the Carlos III hospital in Madrid who had been treating Spanish priests Manuel Garcia Viejo and Miguel Pajares. Mr Pajares, 75, died in August after contracting the virus in Liberia. Mr Garcia Viejo, 69, died on September 25 after catching Ebola in Sierra Leone. Colleagues last night expressed surprise that the woman, who only entered Mr Garcia Viejo's room once while he was alive and once after he died, had contracted the disease. She fell ill on September 30 after going on holiday. She was admitted to Alcorcon hospital in Madrid on Sunday after testing positive for Ebola. Early this morning she was moved under police escort to Carlos III hospital and was said to be in a stable condition. Jonathan Ball, professor of molecular virology at the University of Nottingham, said "If appropriate containment measures were adopted this really should not have happened. It will be crucial to find out what went wrong so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again." A total of 7,492 cases of Ebola have been reported in West Africa up to October 1, of which 3,439 people have died, including 216 healthcare workers. The Ebola virus is transmitted among humans through close and direct physical contact with bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, faeces and vomit. There is a low risk of it being transmitted indirectly, by contact with previously contaminated surfaces and objects. Ebola is not an airborne virus. President Obama said the US government was considering whether to order more careful screening of airline passengers on departure from West Africa and on arrival in the US. However, as it can take up to 21 days for symptoms to develop, many cases would be missed. American video journalist, Ashoka Mukpo, was taken to Nebraska medical centre in Omaha yesterday after contracting Ebola in Liberia. His father said it could have happened when he helped clean a vehicle someone had died in. His symptoms were said to be mild. Thomas Duncan, a Liberian visiting the US, was the first person diagnosed with Ebola in America and is being treated in isolation at a Dallas hospital. His condition is critical but stable.
More than 100 Army medics will be sent to Sierra Leone to help tackle the Ebola crisis. Personnel from the 22 Field Hospital have been undergoing an extensive training exercise in full protective suits, with simulated casualties in make up. They will staff a field hospital set up specifically to treat medics who have caught the disease, not members of the general public. It was expected the medics will be sent on their humanitarian operation to west Africa within the next few weeks. The exercise at Strensall Barracks, York, saw a hangar converted into a mock up field hospital. Staff from 22 Field Hospital, normally based in York, will operate a 12 bed facility to treat health care workers. The exercise which is expected to last two weeks has been running for 13 hours every day. Casualties with symptoms or suspicion of the Ebola virus, complete with realistic make up and prosthetic veins, present themselves to the teams who are dressed in full protective plastic suits and face masks. An Army spokeswoman said "They are going through all their procedures and getting atuned to wearing their personal protective equipment, working in quite hot temperatures. "The training centre, which was geared up to be a replica of Camp Bastion in Afghanistan, can vary the temperature and it is warm in there today. "The casualties come in and the medics test their procedures and working through using their protective equipment." International Development Secretary Justine Greening said the Government was continuing to keep the issue of tighter travel restrictions under review after a Spanish nurse tested positive for the Ebola virus in the first known transmission outside West Africa. Ms Greening told BBC News "It doesn't change the assessment of the risk to the UK ... but what it does show is why we're right to be working with governments as we are in Sierra Leone to help them combat this disease where ... it's spreading so rapidly now." She added "Well, obviously the Spanish authorities are now looking at how this case happened. We certainly have incredibly stringent procedures here in the UK obviously we had our own experience treating Will Pooley and the precautions that clinicians had to take in helping him get back to full health. I met him at the London conference that we held last week to drum up international support for tackling Ebola in West Africa." British nurse Mr Pooley, who has been cured of Ebola, is back from a life saving mission to the United States where he gave blood to try to help a victim of the virus. The 29 year old, from Suffolk, became the first Briton to contract the virus after working as a volunteer nurse in Sierra Leone, which is one of the worst hit countries of the current outbreak. He was flown back to Britain on August 24 and recovered after being treated at an isolation unit at London's Royal Free Hospital. Ms Greening said it was key to expand the support being provided. She said "The UK is helping to build treatment beds, so that we can provide more treatment for more patients ... working in communities so that we can catch patients and isolate them at an earlier stage, helping the Sierra Leonean government and their ministry of health and their own health system to be able to cope with this disease and then additionally working with the many NGOs who are on the ground, like Medecins Sans Frontieres to help them do the most that they can do to be part of tackling this disease. "But, as we are seeing at this point, the disease is continuing to spread and what we need to do is get those transmission rates back under control, but until that happens we will continue to see more infections and a growing number of infections over the coming weeks." On the possible need for tighter travel restrictions, she said "Public Health England has issued Border Force's extremely clear cut guidance on the steps they need to take. The World Health Organisation has also issued very clear guidance on the screening that needs to happen for people exiting West Africa, so I think the authorities know what rules are in place, but we continue to keep all of those areas under review constantly."
A nurse being treated for the deadly Ebola virus in Spain has been transferred from one Madrid hospital to another. Spain's health minister announced that the case was the first known transmission of the current outbreak of Ebola outside West Africa. The female nurse had helped treat two Spanish priests repatriated to Madrid after contracting Ebola in West Africa. The nurse is believed to have contracted the virus from one of the priests. She originally went to the Alcorcon hospital with a fever on Sunday and was placed in isolation. She is now in Carlos III Hospital for further treatment. Spanish authorities are looking into how she was infected at a modern hospital with special equipment for helping people with deadly viruses. "We are tracing everyone she has been in contact with and checking what contact they had," explained Antonio Alemay, from Madrid's public health system. "We need to make sure the correct protection measures were taken, such as isolation, and temperature checks twice a day for 21 days," he added. The nurse's husband has been quarantined in hospital, the head of Spain's public health service told parliament on Tuesday.
Spain's Ministry of Health confirmed on 6 October that a caregiver has contracted the Ebola virus in a Madrid hospital, after treating a missionary who came into contact with the disease in Sierra Leone, reports ABC. The Spanish daily notes the incident marks "the first case of transmission of the virus beyond Africa". Some thirty people, who were in contact with the caregiver, are also being monitored for signs of the disease. The virus's transmission has raised questions over protection measures. According to ABC, the European Commission is under pressure to ask Spain for
As Spain reports the first case of Ebola contracted on EU soil, DW speaks to one of Germany's leading virologists Jonas Schmidt Chanasit about the threat the deadly virus may pose to Europe. There was always a chance that the virus would be imported to Europe, but the fact that it was contracted by a nurse in a controlled environment was not predicted. How could this have happened? Nobody expected it, and I simply don't understand how it could have happened. They will investigate and find out how it came to pass but it is a surprise, because in actual fact, Europe is well prepared. And even in light of the case, we remain well prepared. So nothing has changed in terms of the basic situation here. One idea that has been mooted is that the nurse became infected by touching clothes that had been worn by the patient. Is that a possibility? It is a possibility. If there were blood or other bodily fluids on the clothing, they would carry the risk of infecting someone, but everyone knows that, and I find it hard to believe that such a silly mistake could have been made. The clothes are disposed of immediately and it's not as if people would be walking about freely with the patient's things under their arm. That would surprise me enormously. There have been precautions and standard guidelines in place for years and people are trained accordingly, so it is genuinely difficult to imagine medical staff acting in that way in Europe. Let me reiterate that it should not have been allowed to happen and it comes as a big surprise. All we can do now is to wait to find out how the nurse became infected. Do you think the threat is being taken seriously enough in European countries? Absolutely. Everyone in Europe is taking it very seriously and they are well prepared to treat patients with Ebola. We have seen from other medical establishments that people can be treated without posing a threat to others. I think what happened in Spain was the result of a mistake and of the guidelines not being strictly adhered to. But that doesn't mean we have to start doubting the way we handle or treat such cases. What is in place is right, and there will never be a way to rule out isolated errors. All you can do in the event of a case like the one in Spain is to look very carefully at what went wrong in order to prevent a repeat occurrence. How likely are we to see Ebola appearing in other European countries? There is always the possibility that we will see cases imported from Africa, but I don't think it's very likely. The measures now in place, which include exit controls and questionnaires at airports in affected countries, should prevent things from getting that far. Yet, if the virus continues to spread in West Africa, and passes into other countries there, it naturally increases the risk for Europe. That said, the conditions here and in most European countries are very different to those in West Africa, so we would be unlikely to see an outbreak on the same scale here. The exit controls you mention rely on human honesty. What if people don't tell the truth? How do you get around that? We have to expect that there will be cases of dishonesty, where people wantonly fail to tell the truth. That in itself is a tragedy, but unfortunately it is the reality we face. Given the three week incubation period and the degree of contact that a single individual can have with other people during that time, even in the case in Spain, there must be scope for significant damage to be done. It is essential to remember that the virus can only be transmitted when the patient is already sick, that means that if I am infected but not actually sick during the first two weeks of the incubation period, I can't pass the virus on. That has the effect of limiting the spread of the virus because most people who are sick go to the doctor after a couple of days and don't walk around feeling terrible for weeks. Do you think the emergence of this case will have an impact on European and Western efforts to stem the disease in Africa? I hope so. I think it will wake European countries up, and I hope it will lead to resources being made available more quickly, and to specialist help being sent to the affected countries. Pledges have been made, but to date, very little has actually arrived where it is needed.
(BRUSSELS) The EU said Tuesday it has asked Spain to explain how a nurse treating Ebola patients in Madrid contracted the deadly disease, the first known case of transmission outside Africa. The European Commission "sent a letter Monday to the Spanish health minister to obtain some clarification" of how this had happened, despite all the precautions taken, a spokesman said. "There is obviously a problem somewhere," Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said, at a time when all European Union member states are supposed to have taken measures to prevent an Ebola outbreak. Tests confirmed that the nurse had been infected with the deadly virus that has killed more than 3,400 people in west Africa. Spanish health officials are now trying to find out whom she may have come into contact with and are monitoring 30 people including her co workers and husband closely for symptoms of the deadly disease. The woman was part of a medical team at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital that treated two elderly Spanish missionaries who died of Ebola shortly after they were repatriated from Africa. Vincent said that despite the case, the Commission was not unduly concerned and believed that the spread of the virus in Europe "remains highly unlikely." The Commission, however, hopes that Spain will provide details by Wednesday so that they can be discussed by European Union officials. The case "may even in some way serve as a lesson for other member states," Vincent said, noting that the Madrid hospital involved had been designated as a special Ebola treatment centre. The nurse, who is married without children, is now being treated in isolation at a hospital in Alcorcon, a southern Madrid suburb, where she is said to be in a stable condition although still running a fever. Europe and the United States have been touched by the disease but until now all the cases stemmed from people who caught the virus in west Africa and who then returned home.
A Spanish nurse who treated an Ebola victim in Madrid tested positive for the virus on Monday, according to BBC News. Several Spanish media sources reported that sources within Spain's health authority had reported that the nurse initial tested positive for Ebola but that officials are waiting for final results before announcing the development, Reuters reports. The nurse would be the first patient to contract the disease outside of Africa. While there have been several confirmed cases of Ebola in Europe and the U.S., all patients up to the point were originally infected in Africa and brought the disease elsewhere. Health care workers are at especially high risk for infection. Dallas hospital and ambulance workers who treated the U.S.'s first Ebola patient, Thomas Eric Duncan, account for seven of ten people the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has singled out to be quarantined and monitored for signs of the disease. (RELATED White House Trying To Get Ahead Of Ebola Fear)
MADRID (Reuters) Four people, including the nurse who tested for Ebola on Monday, were hospitalized and being monitored over suspicion of potential contagion of the deadly disease, Spain's health authorities said on Tuesday. Officials for Madrid's health system told a press conference those hospitalized included the nurse's husband, a traveler from one affected country and another health worker. They also said the nurse, who did not leave Madrid during her vacations, was currently being treated with drip using antibodies from previous infected patients. (Reporting by Inmaculada Sanz, writing by Julien Toyer Editing by Paul Day)
GENEVA, Oct. 7 (Xinhua) The World Health Organization (WHO) on Tuesday confirmed a Spanish nurse diagnosed with Ebola virus disease. WHO Regional Office for Europe said in a statement that Spanish authorities Monday night notified WHO under the International Health Regulations that an auxiliary nurse in Spain has been diagnosed with Ebola virus disease. The health care worker was treating a person who had been infected with Ebola in Sierra Leone and was medically evacuated by Spain to Madrid on Sept. 22, where he died three days later. Spanish authorities are conducting an intensive investigation of this case, to determine the mode of transmission and to trace those who have been in contact with the health care worker. WHO is ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required. On Sept. 30, WHO was informed of the first confirmed imported case of Ebola virus disease in the United States.
A second case of Ebola may have been detected in Madrid on Tuesday, a spokesman for the Ministry of Health told El Mundo newspaper. Like the first victim announced on Monday, the second victim was part of a medical team treating two now deceased victims of Ebola a Spanish priest, Miguel Pajares, and missionary Manuel Garc a Viejo. Media reports said the second victim is in isolation at Hospital Carlos III, along with the first medical worker and her husband. The European Union sent a letter Monday to the Spanish health minister to inquire as to how the first medical worker contracted the deadly disease, said media reports. Barbara Kollmeyer 415 439 6400 AskNewswires dowjones.com Subscribe to WSJ http online.wsj.com?mod djnwires
WHO Regional Office for Europe statement Spanish nurse diagnosed with Ebola virus disease GENEVA, Switzerland, October 7, 2014 African Press Organization (APO) Spanish authorities notified WHO under the International Health Regulations (IHR) last night that a Spanish nurse working in Spain has been diagnosed with Ebola virus disease (EVD). The health care worker was treating an individual who had been infected with Ebola in Sierra Leone and medically evacuated by Spain to Madrid on 22 September 2014, where he died on 25 September 2014.
A Spanish nurse has tested positive for Ebola weeks after she treated a patient who eventually died of the disease, in what may be the first case of virus' transmission outside Western Africa. Ana Mato, Spain's health minister, said the nurse was part of a medical team that treated Manuel Garcia Viejo, a 69 year old Spanish priest who died last month in Spain after contracting the virus while working in Sierra Leone. "Two tests were done and the two were positive," a spokesman for the health department of Madrid told the AFP news agency on Monday. The nurse was now in isolation in a hospital on the outskirts of Madrid. Journalist Miguel Anxo told Al Jazeera that the most of the health minister's press conference on Monday was decoted "to trying to calm fears that the disease will spread." According to Anxo, although the nurse interacted with people freely before being aware of having the disease, "doctors have been clear that until you show symptoms of Ebola, it is supposed not to be contagious, and therefore the authorities are hoping the virus have not spread due to the short span of time since she has displayed symptoms." The Ebola outbreak in West Africa has killed at least 3,439 people since it began in March, out of nearly 7,500 confirmed, probable and suspected cases. Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea are the worst hit countries. Meanwhile, the US administration said it is not considering a ban on travellers from countries most affected by the virus. "A travel ban is not something that we're currently considering," said Josh Earnest, a White House spokesman. "We feel good about the measures that are already in place." Five US citizens have contracted the disease, four of whom contracted the disease while working in West Africa. The fifth was diagnosed with the disease in the US although it is unclear where the patient contracted the disease.
A nurse in Spain has become the first person to contract the Ebola virus outside of West Africa. The case adds some credence to what looked like dodgy looking statistics being bandied about over recent days. The Madrid hospital where the nurse works is being investigated by the European Commission after the 40 year old woman was taken ill. She had been treating two Spanish missionaries who were flown home after contracting the virus in Liberia. Ebola is highly contagious and sufferers must be completely isolated to prevent spreading. Madrid healthcare officials said that she had been wearing appropriate safety clothing while treating the patients. The disease is at its most contagious in its final, terminal stages, however it can take up to three weeks for symptoms to take effect. Although the World Health Organisation has not imposed any official travel restrictions, some airlines have suspended flights to the worst affected countries. A mixture of spread patterns and airline traffic data has been cobbled together this week to predict a 75 chance the virus could be imported to France by October 24, and a 50 chance it could hit Britain by that date. More modest predictions suggested that France's risk is still 25 , and Britain's is 15 . However, in developed countries, it is unlikely that the disease would have the same effect as in West African regions, where more than 7,200 have been affected and at least 3,400 people have died so far. Deadly outbreaks have been reported in Guinea, Nigeria and Senegal, but Sierra Leone and Liberia have been the worst affected. European and American Ebola sufferers have been flown home for treatment, but this is the first case to have been contracted outside of Africa. The woman's husband has also been put in to isolation.
Seriously. Are they mad? A nurse who attended the missionary who died of Ebola in Madrid... has been found to have contracted the virus and that she showed the symptoms of the disease for SIX days before she was diagnosed. BBC and El Mundo. She felt seedy, this nurse who was looking after the Ebola missionary, but they sent her away on vacation. Elsewhere, reports say a second nurse is showing symptoms.
Madrid Quarantine has been extended to the spouse of a Madrid nurse diagnosed with Ebola, Spanish media reported Tuesday, citing public health sources. The 40 year old nurse, whose identity is being kept undisclosed, was part of a 30 person medical team that treated two Spanish missionaries who had contracted the virus in Liberia and Sierra Leone. She visited the room of one patient Manuel Garcia Viejo twice during his treatment, according to Spanish daily El Pais. Garcia Viejo died on 25 September. The nurse began to feel ill on 30 September, but still didn't present clinical symptoms of the virus such as a fever. She entered the hospital on Sunday, and her diagnosis was announced by public health authorities on Monday. Those days between 30 September and 6 October will be the focus of a public health effort to trace any possible contagion, because Ebola can only be contracted from a person who already displays symptoms of the disease. According to Fernando Simon, an emergency co ordinator with the Spanish Health Ministry, authorities are investigating the possibility of further contamination of the medical team that cared for the missionaries. They are also concerned about the status of the nurse's husband, who had the most contact with her prior to her official diagnosis. The Madrid nurse is the first confirmed case of human to human transmission of the disease in Europe.
Members of the German army, Bundeswehr, prepare volunteers during a barrier nursing course for dealing with infectious diseases at the Bernhard Nocht Institute in Hamburg Ocotber 7, 2014. (Reuters Fabian Bimmer) The spread of Ebola in Europe is "unavoidable", the World Health Organization said shortly after the contraction of four new cases was announced in Spain. "Such imported cases and similar events as have happened in Spain will happen also in the future, most likely," the WHO European director Zsuzsanna Jakab told Reuters. On Monday scientists predicted that there was a 75 percent chance that Ebola would reach France by the end October and a 50 percent chance for the UK. READ 75 chance Ebola will reach France by end October, 50 for UK scientists The most dangerous contributor to the spread is the behavior of the virus. Its symptoms catch people unawares and normally follow a 21 day incubation period, during which there's literally no visible sign the person has contracted Ebola. This is further complicated by the EU's free movement system one can literally infect anyone they come into contact with in the space of a few days if they were to drive or fly from one country to another. "It is quite unavoidable ... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around," Jakab said. WHO has so far placed no restrictions on flights to the worst affected countries. While British Airways and Emirates are no longer flying there, Air France has only suspended flights to Sierra Leone not Liberia, Guinea or Nigeria (though air crews were recently offered the option to refuse flying to those destinations). Additionally, patients who have contacted the disease in West Africa have been repatriated for treatment such as the two missionaries who died in Septamber in Spain one of whom infected a 44 year old Spanish nurse who was diagnosed on Monday. READ Spanish nurse tests positive for Ebola after treating victim in Madrid Health officials in Madrid said on Tuesday that three more people are in hospital on suspicion of contracting Ebola after the diagnosis of the nurse. The nurse is now being treated with a drip using antibodies from those previously infected with the virus. Approximately 22 people who have been in contact with the woman, dubbed by media the "Spanish Ebola nurse," have been identified and are being monitored, Madrid health officials told reporters Tuesday. However, WHO has stated that the continent is well prepared to control the disease. "It will happen," she said. "But the most important thing in our view is that Europe is still at low risk and that the western part of the European region particularly is the best prepared in the world to respond to viral haemorrhagic fevers including Ebola," Jakab said.
Four people have been quarantined after a Spanish nurse contracted Ebola. The unnamed woman is the first known person have have caught the deadly virus outside of West Africa. Investigations are under way at a hospital in Madrid. Health authorities in Spain said they had been in touch with a total of 22 people who are thought to have been in contact with the 40 year old nurse. Four people including the nurse's husband have been quarantined. Around 3,400 people have died in the outbreak mostly in West Africa. MORE Spanish nurse becomes first person to contract ebola in Europe
A medical worker in protective gear stands next to a special stretcher carrying a Spanish nurse who was infected by Ebola, outside Alcorcon's hospital, near Madrid, Spain, early October 7, 2014. A Spanish nurse has become the first person to contract Ebola outside of Africa, casting doubt over measures taken in Spain to control the potential spread of the deadly disease. A Spanish nurse has contracted Ebola in what is being reported as the first known case that someone has come down with the disease outside of West Africa. "We are working in coordination to give the best care to the patient and to guarantee the safety of all citizens," said Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato on Monday, CNN reported. The woman had apparently treated a Spanish missionary and a Spanish priest who died after contracting the disease in West Africa and returning to Spain. The woman, who wasn't named, was checked into hospital this week with a fever, one of the symptoms of Ebola. While there have been several cases of westerners being diagnosed with the disease back home after returning from West Africa, including a number of Americans, this is the first reported case where a person has caught the disease outside the region. The largest Ebola outbreak in history has killed over 3,400 people across West Africa, with the countries of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea being the hardest hit. The Spanish nurse had treated 69 year old Spanish priest Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died in September in Madrid. While she remains in stable condition, the news is raising global concern, and the hospital where she's being treated is examining other workers who were in close contact with her. "We have started studying all of the contacts the patient had since her symptoms began, including the health professionals who have been treating her," said Antonio Alemany, the head of Madrid's primary healthcare services. Early detection and treatment has proven effective in helping patients recover from the virus, but it remains extremely deadly and has a 50 percent mortality rate. As many as 370 heath care workers are reported to have come down with Ebola in the hardest hit countries, underlining the dangers of working in close proximity with the disease. "At greatest risk in all Ebola outbreaks are healthcare workers," said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease expert at Vanderbilt University, according to The Associated Press. Earlier this week journalist Ashoka Mukpo became the fifth known American to have been diagnosed with Ebola, though he also contracted the virus while working in West Africa. Meanwhile Dallas man Eric Duncan, who caught Ebola while on a trip to Liberia, remains in critical condition at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital. He is said to be getting an experimental treatment called brincidofovir, which was developed to treat other viruses, but tests suggests it may also be effective against Ebola.
This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100 accurate. a Spanish medical worker has tested positive for you the lack of what is suspected as the first transmission of the deceased ... outside West Africa since the current outbreak began ... the work protested pasta after treating infected Africa based missionary who was Quantum attack in September ... the European Union has contacted Spanish authorities to find out more details about the medical worker contracted Ebola Spanish officials sought to play down any sense of crisis ... that said they were unable to explain what went wrong ... and Tony romaine and director of primary health care than the trek region said we don't know whether any Harris remains way investigating the mechanism of transmission could've been ... a female worker contracted the virus while working at my treads Carlos that their hospital which had been specially prepared to treat the deceased ... effective medical worker was one of thirteen was intriguing profit pricey and the ankle ... and Spanish priest making of the hottest who died of people and August ... all of those medical workers and no one can claim tax as well as other people ... that may have been in contact with infected medical worker ... on Tuesday Spain's public health director told Parliament every recommendation of the World Health Organization was being followed ...
Fuse Thinkstock(MADRID) A nurse in Madrid, Spain, has been diagnosed with Ebola after she had helped treat two Spanish missionaries who eventually succumbed to the deadly virus. It's the first time someone has become infected by someone carrying the disease outside of West Africa. According to the BBC, the unidentified nurse, who is 40, began feeling ill a week ago but did not seek treatment until Oct. 5. She worked at hospital Carlos III de Madrid with a team that wore special protective gear when they tried to save the lives of the Spanish priests who contracted Ebola while in West Africa. Since her diagnosis, the nurse has been moved to a special unit where she's described as being in stable condition.
(BRUSSELS) The European Union said Tuesday it is urgently airlifting relief goods to west Africa to combat the Ebola crisis, as the disease threatened its shores with an infection in Spain. Three 747 jumbo jet cargo planes carrying 100 tonnes of aid will be sent to the worst affected countries of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea, the European Commission said. The first plane leaves on Friday for Freetown carrying personal protection equipment including masks and gloves and medicines. The EU was also setting up a system for the evacuation of international staff from the affected countries if they become infected, it said. "We are in a race against time to fight Ebola," EU humanitarian commissioner Kristalina Georgieva said in a statement. The airlift and the evacuation are being funded by four million euros ( five million) from the EU which is being allocated to the UN Children's Fund, the EU said. The evacuation system allows patients to be flown within 48 hours to European hospitals "that are equipped to deal with the disease", the commission said. The EU earlier Tuesday said it had asked Spain to explain how a nurse treating Ebola patients in Madrid contracted the deadly disease, the first known case of transmission outside Africa. The nurse worked at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital, where she cared for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus after being flown home from west Africa, where the disease has killed nearly 3,500 people. Georgieva said the European Commission, the EU's executive arm, has so far pledged 180 million euros ( 227 million) in aid to fight the Ebola crisis.
MADRID (Reuters) Four people have been hospitalized in Spain to try to stem the spread of Ebola after a Spanish nurse became the first person in the world known to have contracted the virus outside of Africa, health authorities said on Tuesday. The nurse, who tested positive for the virus on Monday, her husband, who is showing no symptoms of the disease, and two other people are being closely monitored in hospital, health officials told a news conference in Madrid. One of those hospitalized is a health worker who has diarrhea but no fever. The other is a Spaniard who traveled from Nigeria, said Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital where the infected nurse treated two Spanish missionaries who contracted the disease in Africa. With concerns growing around the world of the Ebola pandemic spreading beyond West Africa, the Spanish officials sought to reassure the public that they were tackling the threat. Twenty two people who came into contact with the nurse are being monitored, Perez Santamaria said. They have not been isolated but they are having their temperature taken twice a day to check for signs of infection. Officials said they were still investigating how the nurse was infected. She went on holiday after the second of the missionaries she had been caring for died on Sept. 25, although, they stressed, she had not left Madrid. She began feeling ill on Sept. 30 and was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday. "This has taken us by surprise," said Perez Santamaria. "We are revising our protocols, improving them." A spokesman for the European Commission said the case would be discussed at an EU Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. Jonathan Ball, a professor of molecular virology at Britain's University of Nottingham, said the nurse should not have contracted the deadly disease if appropriate containment and control measures had been taken. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again," he told Reuters. The nurse is being treated with antibodies from previous infected patients, Perez Santamaria said. (Additional reporting by Kate Kelland in London and Philip Blenkinsop in Brussels Editing by Julien Toyer and Robin Pomeroy)
The Spanish authorities have notified the World Health Organization (WHO) about the first case of Ebola in Europe. WHO said on Tuesday they were informed of the case late on Monday. The victim is reportedly a female Spanish healthcare worker. Fadela Chaib, spokesperson for WHO in Geneva, spoke to the press in French about the case. (Fadela Chaib followed by English interpretation, under and out) Ms Chaib said Spain is currently carrying out a medical investigation and analysis in order to know more about the case. She added that more information would soon be available from WHO's regional office in Denmark. As of last Friday, the Ebola outbreak disease had claimed the lives of 3,431 people in West Africa.
New Jersey's First News, hosted by Eric Scott, written and produced by Matthew White and Patrick Lavery. Full podcast available below. Digital support, with additional links, by Dan Alexander. Sayreville Season Canceled Whatever happened within the Sayreville High Football program was so bad, district officials have decided to cancel the entire season. The community is in shock, and still in need of answers. Keeping a Vigil The mother of a Hamilton pre schooler who is suffering from the same Enterovirus that killed a four year old boy says she constantly fears the worst. Tabatha Vassy told ABC News her after a four day hospital stay her son isn't any worse but is also no better. She sleeps little and every four hours gives her son breathing treatments. And like 4 year old Eli Waller has no cold symptoms, just wheezing and shortness of breath. New Ebola Concerns A nurse in Spain has become the first person known to have contracted the virus outside West Africa. The nurse was part of a team that treated two missionaries flown home to Spain after becoming infected in Liberia. And medical workers in Texas are waiting to find out if they've become infected by a Liberian man who became ill with Ebola after arriving in Dallas. President Obama says he will be working to come up with new screening procedures at the airport to try and stop Ebola from spreading in the U.S. In the wake of the first case of Ebola in the U.S. Obama acknowledged Americans' concerns about Ebola, calling it a very serious disease. Hands Free Distraction Two new studies find that voice activated smartphones and dashboard infotainment systems may be making the distracted driving problem worse instead of better. Studies released by AAA and the University of Utah say many of the systems are so error prone or complex that they require more concentration from drivers rather than less. Parents Behaving Badly This story is from Toms River where a 46 year old man is charged with assault for tackling his son's football coach. The coach had just told the team he was cancelling their season because of ongoing poor sportsmanship and bad attitudes. It's then, witnesses say, the dad ran across the field, tackled the coach and fought until bystanders separated them. League officials have gotten involved and say the team will finish the season. The coach has been kicked out... Cheating on the Job Millennials will go to disturbing lengths in order to get ahead at work, according to new research... Middle Class Squeeze The economy continues to slowly improve and the official unemployment rate keeps going down, but middle class families, especially in New Jersey, are getting squeezed like they've never been squeezed before. Shocked and Numbed "Real Housewife" Teresa Giudice is still taking no responsibility for the tax evasion and bankruptcy fraud that has her headed to prison. Giudice says the ordeal has taught her not to sign contracts before she reads them. On Bravo, she said she is still shocked to be facing over a year in prison... Keeping Info Private With all of the stories about corporate data breaches it would be an understatement to say that people are reluctant to give out their personal information. A bill moving in Trenton would completely eliminate gift card data collection requirements that are set to take effect in July 2016. Leaf Peeping It's that time of year again the leaves are changing and driving through New Jersey is becoming quite picturesque as the vibrant colors of the fall are beginning to take over. Still Popular Governor Christie's popularity is on the rise across the nation but has been slumping back home. Some have suggested his frequent travel out of state is hurting his poll numbers in New Jersey but Christie dismissed that notion. He'll be campaigning for GOP candidates in Florida, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire this week. Cheap Oil We've all heard about those cheaper gas prices, as the per gallon prices goes lower and lower. The same thing is happening for heating oil consumers. Concessions on the Table The owners of the Taj Mahal in Atlantic City say they will close next month unless the union agrees to major givebacks including an end to pensions and paid health care. Union workers will protest today clogging streets and blocking traffic... Even with all the publicity about how some prescription painkillers can lead to heroin addiction, it seems most New Jersey parents have no idea what kinds of medicines are being prescribed for their kids when they suffer a serious injury because they never ask... MLB Playoffs You can get your first listen of news from around New Jersey every weekday even if you're not up at 5 a.m. Subscribe to New Jersey 101.5 First News Podcast for daily updates of New Jersey news, weather, and traffic each weekday morning and listen back on your iPhone, Android or other compatible mobile device.
The Spanish nurse infected with Ebola is moved to Carlos III Hospital from Alcorcon Hospital on 7 October, 2014 in Alcorcon, Spain(Getty) The husband of the Madrid nurse who became the first person outside of Africa to contract the deadly Ebola virus has been placed in quarantine. The nurse was a member of the medical team at the Spanish capital's La Paz Carlos III hospital that treated two missionaries who died from the tropical virus after returning from Sierra Leone in West Africa. Mercedes Vinuesa, the head of Spain's public health service, confirmed to the Spanish parliament that the woman's husband was being kept in quarantine. "The husband is already in hospital and is being monitored so that he can have a quarantine situation with better monitoring," he said. A European Union spokesman also revealed the European Commission had delivered a letter to the Spanish health minister in order "to obtain some clarification" as to how the medical worker contracted the disease in light of safety precautions. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. The nurse who has caught Ebola is yet to be named but is believed to be in a stable condition. It is reported that she departed on holiday following the death of the second missionary who had contracted the disease on 25 September. Spanish officials confirmed that the nurse began to feel Ebola like symptoms on 30 September but did not disclose where she went on holiday. RelatedSaudi Health Minister Confirms Hajj Free of EbolaEbola Outbreak Spanish Nurse 'First Person to Contract Disease Outside of Africa'Ebola Outbreak Liberia Hospitals and Treatment Centres Struggle to Cope PHOTOS Ebola Outbreak Sierra Leone 'Bureaucracy and Incompetence' Has US Aid Stuck in Dock for MonthsUganda Extremely Deadly Pathogen Marburg Virus Kills Hospital Worker
Nurse helped treat missionary, priest who died after contracting Ebola Photos Four more potential cases of Ebola were under observation Tuesday in Spain, health authorities said Tuesday, a day after a nurse's assistant became the first person known to have contracted the deadly virus outside Africa in the current outbreak. The woman helped treat two Spanish missionaries, both of whom had contracted Ebola in West Africa, one in Liberia and the other in Sierra Leone. Both died after returning to Spain. The developments come just as the organization Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) reports that a Norwegian staff member has contracted the deadly virus. The staffer had been working in the Sierra Leone city of Bo and was placed in isolation Sunday after developing a fever, the organization said. The worker is being sent to a treatment center in Europe. In Spain, no details have yet been given of exactly how the nurse's assistant contracted the virus, and her condition is unknown. Francisco Arnalis, head of internal medicine at the Carlos III Hospital, told a news conference that the three other potential Ebola cases are being monitored there. A hospital spokeswoman said later Tuesday that another nurse's assistant who is on the same team as the infected nurse's assistant is under observation. This more recent case was admitted to the hospital after she "started having a little bit of a temperature," said the spokeswoman, who wasn't named as is customary in Spain. Earlier, health officials explained that one of the people being monitored is the original nurse's assistant's husband, who faces a high risk of infection and had no protection. Another is a suspected case in a man who traveled overseas and has tested negative twice. The fourth, a nurse, is not a suspected case but has been brought in as a precaution after suffering diarrhea. She was exposed, but she was wearing protective gear, Arnalis said. Thirty people from Carlos III Hospital and 22 others from Alcorcon hospital plus family members are being monitored, according to authorities. It was not immediately known whether the nurse's assistant hospitalized late Tuesday was one of these 30 contacts at Carlos III Hospital. The hospital will not release information about the status of the nurse's assistant, who has not been named, in order to respect her privacy, director Rafael Santamaria said. The hospital has two potential treatments at its disposal, said Dr. Jose Ramon Arribas, one using an IV drip with the antibodies of Ebola survivors and the other an antiviral drug. "This is a treatment that the WHO (World Health Organization) has recommended, even though they haven't verified its efficacy," he said of the IV drip. EU We need to know what happened Spanish authorities have said that all the proper protocols and procedures were followed in the care of the two missionaries. But the European Union has asked for an explanation as to how the woman was infected. European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said on Tuesday that "Spain told us all the protocols have been followed, but obviously something wrong happened." There have been 10 evacuations of Ebola infected patients from Africa to Europe, eight of those within the European Union, Vincent said and it is first time that something like this has happened. "The hospitals where the patients are being taken are supposed to be equipped and ready to deal with Ebola patients," he said. "If protocols are being followed, it's highly unlikely that an outbreak could happen in the EU. But again, zero risk doesn't exist, particularly in a hospital, where staff deal with sick people. "We need to find out as soon as possible what happened and if we need to revise procedures." There will be an extra meeting of European officials to discuss the Spanish Ebola case on Wednesday, he said. The World Health Organization said it was "ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required," as it investigates the case and traces the infected woman's contacts. In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron will lead a Cabinet meeting to discuss way to coordinate how to handle response to Ebola there, if it's necessary. Cameron called Sierra Leone President Ernest Bai Koroma to discuss the status of the outbreak in the West African nation and talk about how aid the UK has provided is helping. According to Downing Street, the Sierra Leone leader said the situation continues to be "very serious" and there was a need to train more medical staff, improve burial processes and develop a better system for running service treatment centers. Unions question equipment used Some Spanish unions have blamed the government, saying they warned it that the personal protective equipment used by the medical team was not of the highest standard. Angry doctors and nurses outside the Carlos III Hospital where the nurse's assistant is being treated and where the two missionaries were cared for before her said they were outraged the pair had been brought to the hospital, one in August and the other in September. They said that the two priests, Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia Viejo, were almost dead when they arrived, and that they should not have been brought back to Spain, thereby putting other people's lives at risk. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato announced Monday that testing had confirmed the nurse's assistant has the virus. The husband of the nurse's assistant, who is under observation, is not sick, a spokesman for the Health Ministry said. It was not clear whether he is under quarantine. The couple have no children. The assistant was one of about 30 health professionals in Spain who helped treat the Ebola patients. They and the ambulance team that took her to the hospital are now reportedly under observation. No word on where she took her vacation Health officials said the assistant developed symptoms on September 30. She was not hospitalized until this week, when her only symptom was a fever. She was first taken to a hospital in southern Madrid before being transferred to Carlos III Hospital, where she had helped care for the Ebola patients. The second of the missionaries died on September 26, and she went on vacation a day later, health officials said. They have not said where that vacation was taken. A few days later, she reported that she was not feeling well but her temperatures were not very high, officials said. It was only several days later that her temperature soared and she was hospitalized. An investigation is underway to find everyone the assistant may have had contact with while infectious. So far, there are no other known related cases. Health authorities have urged people to stay calm, as they hope that the virus' spread is contained. "We are working in coordination to give the best care to the patient and to guarantee the safety of all citizens," said Mato, the health minister. Obama National security priority The news came amid growing fears in the United States that the disease could spread. The first person to be diagnosed in the United States with Ebola, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical but stable condition in Texas, according to Candace White, a spokeswoman for Texas Health. He is on a ventilator and receiving kidney dialysis, she said, adding that his liver function, which declined over the weekend, has improved. He is continuing to receive an investigational medication, White said. During a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention press conference on Monday, CNN asked Texas Department of State Health Services Dr. David Lakey how care protocols in Spain compared to those involving Duncan in Texas. Lakey said he personally went to the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital ward in Dallas where the patient is being treated, and saw that there was extensive security and a detailed method of how providers were protecting themselves. "They take this really seriously," he said, describing treatment protocol as "meticulous." CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said none of the people who Duncan came into contact with before his diagnosis that the CDC has identified for monitoring has shown symptoms. Frieden also said the agency has not made final decisions about possible ways to screen at airports in the United States. Meanwhile, some of the U.S. military personnel being deployed to Liberia to help tackle the Ebola crisis may come into contact with the virus, a Pentagon official said Tuesday. The head of U.S. Africa Command, Gen. David Rodriguez, said that while the majority of U.S. troops involved in the mission would not be exposed to the disease, those in mobile testing labs could have contact in that environment. "They're all trained at a very, very high level," Rodriguez told reporters of the lab personnel, who constitute a "separate, specialty element of the force." President Obama told reporters Monday, "As I've said from the start of this outbreak, I consider this a top national security priority. This is not just a matter of charity. ... This is an issue about our safety." Obama called for protocols to help stop the spread of the disease, including additional air passenger screening, while downplaying the risk of an epidemic in the United States. Ebola has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, with more than 7,400 suspected, probable and confirmed cases. The virus is transmitted through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, feces and vomit. The incubation period, from the time of infection to symptoms, is two to 21 days. Recommended
A member of the Cleaning Guys Haz Mat clean up company removes items from the apartment where Ebola patient Thomas Eric Duncan was staying before being admitted to a hospital in Dallas, Texas(Getty) Fear has gripped the Indian city of Manipur after a Japanese tourist was taken to hospital suspected of contracting Ebola. Kawakubo Yuko was making a stopover in Imphal, after visiting five other countries, when she became ill and starting showing symptoms of the deadly virus. She had checked in at a hotel in the capital after reaching Manipur from Myanmar in south Asia by road. The 27 year old is being held at the JN Institute of Medical Sciences, awaiting the results of her Ebola tests. If she tests positive, Yuko will be sent to an isolation ward at the Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, according to India's Z News service. The Indian authorities are reportedly now considering to screen all tourists travelling into Manipur for the disease, which has wiped out more than 3,400 people in Africa. A Spanish nurse is also waiting to see if she has the disease after she treated priest Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died after catching the virus while working for the Hospital Order of San Juan de Dios in the Sierra Leonean city of Lunsar. Additionally, Thomas Eric Duncan, in Dallas, Texas, is "fighting for his life" after being the first case in the US to contract Ebola after travelling from West Africa. The increase in the number of suspected cases comes as the World Health Organization assures people the disease is not airborne and can only be transmitted by direct contact with bodily fluids. RelatedEbola Spanish Nurse Contracted Virus as Suit Worn 'did not Meet Safety Requirements'Ebola Outbreak Infected Nurse's Husband Quarantined in SpainEbola 'Attack Patients with Napalm to Defeat Virus' Todd Kincannon, Pro Life Politician SaysEbola Outbreak Liberia Hospitals and Treatment Centres Struggle to Cope PHOTOS
The Spanish nurse infected with Ebola is moved to Carlos III Hospital from Alcorcon Hospital on 7 October, 2014 in Alcorcon, Spain.(Getty) The Spanish nurse who tested positive for Ebola in Madrid is believed to have contracted the virus due to the inadequacy of the protective suit she was wearing. The nurse, yet to be named, worked with a 30 member team at Carlos III Hospital to treat Spanish priest Manuel Garcia Viejo and missionary Miguel Pajares, who both contracted Ebola in West Africa. However, the hospital's health workers said that the suits worn to attend the priest and the missionary did not meet the necessary safety requirements, Spanish newspaper El Pais reported. The nurse should have worn fully waterproofed clothing with biosafety level 4 and with breathing autonomy. However, the suit used had only biosafety level 2. Carlos III staff also provided pictures showing that the outfits were not vented and that latex gloves were secured with adhesive tape. They further noted that residues from the rooms of the two clerics were driven by the same elevator used by the rest of the staff. Health workers added the hospital was evacuated before the arrival of Miguel Pajares, but not for Viejo, as the sixth floor had already been hermetically sealed. The nurse is believed to be the first person to have contracted the deadly virus outside Africa, where the disease has killed over 3,400 people since last January. She had fever, a typical symptom of Ebola, for six days before being admitted to Alcorcon Hospital. She was moved to Carlos III on 7 october. Spanish newspaper Lavanguardia said Carlos III admitted the nurse should have been hospitalised earlier. Spain's head of public health Mercedes Vinuesa announced the woman's husband has also been put in quarantine. The Ebola outbreak, the worst in history, is present in several countries in West Africa. In October, a man in Texas was identified as the first victim in the US. The virus is contracted via contact with infected body fluids. The World Health Organisation (WHO) assured people that the deadly disease is not airborne following recent speculation. RelatedNigeria Is Ebola Meme Being Used to Spread Fears Virus 'Was Created by White People'?ALS Ice Bucket Challenge Ivory Coast Launches Ebola 'Soap Bucket Challenge'Liberia Ebola Patient Flees Hospital to Buy Food at MarketEbola Outbreak Liberia Hospitals and Treatment Centres Struggle to Cope PHOTOS Ebola Another Victim 'Rises From Dead' as Hospitals Face Space Crisis in Liberia
The deadly illness has infected up to four people in the Spanish city of Madrid a top tourist destination for Brits that is just a two hour flight away. But yesterday officials for Public Health England PHE said there were no plans to screen travellers for the disease. Spokesman Dr Paul Cosford said "The risk of travellers and people working in affected countries contracting Ebola remains low. "But PHE continues to keep border staff and medical practitioners informed, and request they remain vigilant for unexplained illness in those who have visited these areas in West Africa." Dr Cosford focused on West Africa, where the latest epidemic kicked off, despite a Spanish nurse being diagnosed with the potentially deadly disease. The woman was infected while doing missionary work there and is now receiving treatment in a Madrid hospital, amid fears three other people including her husband there may also be infected. One was last night cleared, but wasn't sure whether this was her hubby. Government travel advisors have also ignored pleas to ban travel to and from the worst hit regions in a bid to keep it away.
MADRID Four more potential cases of Ebola were under observation Tuesday in Spain, health authorities said Tuesday, a day after a nurse's assistant became the first person known to have contracted the deadly virus outside Africa in the current outbreak. The woman helped treat two Spanish missionaries, both of whom had contracted Ebola in West Africa, one in Liberia and the other in Sierra Leone. Both died after returning to Spain. The developments come just as the organization Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) reports that a Norwegian staff member has contracted the deadly virus. The staffer had been working in the Sierra Leone city of Bo and was placed in isolation Sunday after developing a fever, the organization said. The worker is being sent to a treatment center in Europe. In Spain, no details have yet been given of exactly how the nurse's assistant contracted the virus, and her condition is unknown. Francisco Arnalis, head of internal medicine at the Carlos III Hospital, told a news conference that the three other potential Ebola cases are being monitored there. A hospital spokeswoman said later Tuesday that another nurse's assistant who is on the same team as the infected nurse's assistant is under observation. This more recent case was admitted to the hospital after she "started having a little bit of a temperature," said the spokeswoman, who wasn't named as is customary in Spain. Earlier, health officials explained that one of the people being monitored is the original nurse's assistant's husband, who faces a high risk of infection and had no protection. Another is a suspected case in a man who traveled overseas and has tested negative twice. The fourth, a nurse, is not a suspected case but has been brought in as a precaution after suffering diarrhea. She was exposed, but she was wearing protective gear, Arnalis said. Thirty people from Carlos III Hospital and 22 others from Alcorcon hospital plus family members are being monitored, according to authorities. It was not immediately known whether the nurse's assistant hospitalized late Tuesday was one of these 30 contacts at Carlos III Hospital. The hospital will not release information about the status of the nurse's assistant, who has not been named, in order to respect her privacy, director Rafael Santamaria said. The hospital has two potential treatments at its disposal, said Dr. Jose Ramon Arribas, one using an IV drip with the antibodies of Ebola survivors and the other an antiviral drug. "This is a treatment that the WHO (World Health Organization) has recommended, even though they haven't verified its efficacy," he said of the IV drip. EU We need to know what happened Spanish authorities have said that all the proper protocols and procedures were followed in the care of the two missionaries. But the European Union has asked for an explanation as to how the woman was infected. European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said on Tuesday that "Spain told us all the protocols have been followed, but obviously something wrong happened." There have been 10 evacuations of Ebola infected patients from Africa to Europe, eight of those within the European Union, Vincent said and it is first time that something like this has happened. "The hospitals where the patients are being taken are supposed to be equipped and ready to deal with Ebola patients," he said. "If protocols are being followed, it's highly unlikely that an outbreak could happen in the EU. But again, zero risk doesn't exist, particularly in a hospital, where staff deal with sick people. "We need to find out as soon as possible what happened and if we need to revise procedures." There will be an extra meeting of European officials to discuss the Spanish Ebola case on Wednesday, he said. The World Health Organization said it was "ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required," as it investigates the case and traces the infected woman's contacts. In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron will lead a Cabinet meeting to discuss way to coordinate how to handle response to Ebola there, if it's necessary. Cameron called Sierra Leone President Ernest Bai Koroma to discuss the status of the outbreak in the West African nation and talk about how aid the UK has provided is helping. According to Downing Street, the Sierra Leone leader said the situation continues to be "very serious" and there was a need to train more medical staff, improve burial processes and develop a better system for running service treatment centers. Unions question equipment used Some Spanish unions have blamed the government, saying they warned it that the personal protective equipment used by the medical team was not of the highest standard. Angry doctors and nurses outside the Carlos III Hospital where the nurse's assistant is being treated and where the two missionaries were cared for before her said they were outraged the pair had been brought to the hospital, one in August and the other in September. They said that the two priests, Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia Viejo, were almost dead when they arrived, and that they should not have been brought back to Spain, thereby putting other people's lives at risk. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato announced Monday that testing had confirmed the nurse's assistant has the virus. The husband of the nurse's assistant, who is under observation, is not sick, a spokesman for the Health Ministry said. It was not clear whether he is under quarantine. The couple have no children. The assistant was one of about 30 health professionals in Spain who helped treat the Ebola patients. They and the ambulance team that took her to the hospital are now reportedly under observation. No word on where she took her vacation Health officials said the assistant developed symptoms on September 30. She was not hospitalized until this week, when her only symptom was a fever. She was first taken to a hospital in southern Madrid before being transferred to Carlos III Hospital, where she had helped care for the Ebola patients. The second of the missionaries died on September 26, and she went on vacation a day later, health officials said. They have not said where that vacation was taken. A few days later, she reported that she was not feeling well but her temperatures were not very high, officials said. It was only several days later that her temperature soared and she was hospitalized. An investigation is underway to find everyone the assistant may have had contact with while infectious. So far, there are no other known related cases. Health authorities have urged people to stay calm, as they hope that the virus' spread is contained. "We are working in coordination to give the best care to the patient and to guarantee the safety of all citizens," said Mato, the health minister. Obama National security priority The news came amid growing fears in the United States that the disease could spread. The first person to be diagnosed in the United States with Ebola, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical but stable condition in Texas, according to Candace White, a spokeswoman for Texas Health. He is on a ventilator and receiving kidney dialysis, she said, adding that his liver function, which declined over the weekend, has improved. He is continuing to receive an investigational medication, White said. During a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention press conference on Monday, CNN asked Texas Department of State Health Services Dr. David Lakey how care protocols in Spain compared to those involving Duncan in Texas. Lakey said he personally went to the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital ward in Dallas where the patient is being treated, and saw that there was extensive security and a detailed method of how providers were protecting themselves. "They take this really seriously," he said, describing treatment protocol as "meticulous." CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said none of the people who Duncan came into contact with before his diagnosis that the CDC has identified for monitoring has shown symptoms. Frieden also said the agency has not made final decisions about possible ways to screen at airports in the United States. Meanwhile, some of the U.S. military personnel being deployed to Liberia to help tackle the Ebola crisis may come into contact with the virus, a Pentagon official said Tuesday. The head of U.S. Africa Command, Gen. David Rodriguez, said that while the majority of U.S. troops involved in the mission would not be exposed to the disease, those in mobile testing labs could have contact in that environment. "They're all trained at a very, very high level," Rodriguez told reporters of the lab personnel, who constitute a "separate, specialty element of the force." President Obama told reporters Monday, "As I've said from the start of this outbreak, I consider this a top national security priority. This is not just a matter of charity. ... This is an issue about our safety." Obama called for protocols to help stop the spread of the disease, including additional air passenger screening, while downplaying the risk of an epidemic in the United States. Ebola has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, with more than 7,400 suspected, probable and confirmed cases. The virus is transmitted through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, feces and vomit. The incubation period, from the time of infection to symptoms, is two to 21 days.
The World Health Organization (WHO) on Tuesday confirmed a Spanish nurse diagnosed with Ebola virus disease. WHO Regional Office for Europe said in a statement that Spanish authorities Monday night notified WHO under the International Health Regulations that an auxiliary nurse in Spain has been diagnosed with Ebola virus disease. The health care worker was treating a person who had been infected with Ebola in Sierra Leone and was medically evacuated by Spain to Madrid on Sept. 22, where he died three days later. Some 30 other health workers and those who came in contact with her are now being monitored for symptoms. Spanish authorities are conducting an intensive investigation of this case, to determine the mode of transmission and to trace those who have been in contact with the health care worker. WHO is ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required. On Sept. 30, WHO was informed of the first confirmed imported case of Ebola virus disease in the United States.
Madrid A Spanish nurse, who treated a man infected with Ebola in Madrid, has tested positive for the virus. The nurse, who is receiving treatment in the Alcorcon Hospital just outside of Madrid, was part of the team that treated Ebola positive Spanish missionary, Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died Sep 25 in the Carlos III hospital in the north of Madrid, Xinhua reported. The nurse was admitted to the Alcorcon hospital Monday morning with possible symptoms of Ebola, which she had experienced since Sep 30. It was also confirmed that the patient had been in contact with Viejo on two occasions at Carlos III and had been on holiday since his death. She was put into ... Spanish nurse tests positive for Ebola
Madrid (CNN) Four more potential cases of Ebola were under observation Tuesday in Spain, health authorities said Tuesday, a day after a nurse's assistant became the first person known to have contracted the deadly virus outside Africa in the current outbreak. The woman helped treat two Spanish missionaries, both of whom had contracted Ebola in West Africa, one in Liberia and the other in Sierra Leone. Both died after returning to Spain. Spain has outbreak's 1st known case of contracting Ebola outside of Africa The developments come just as the organization Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) reports that a Norwegian staff member has contracted the deadly virus. The staffer had been working in the Sierra Leone city of Bo and was placed in isolation Sunday after developing a fever, the organization said. The worker is being sent to a treatment center in Europe. In Spain, no details have yet been given of exactly how the nurse's assistant contracted the virus, and her condition is unknown. Francisco Arnalis, head of internal medicine at the Carlos III Hospital, told a news conference that the three other potential Ebola cases are being monitored there. A hospital spokeswoman said later Tuesday that another nurse's assistant who is on the same team as the infected nurse's assistant is under observation. This more recent case was admitted to the hospital after she "started having a little bit of a temperature," said the spokeswoman, who wasn't named as is customary in Spain. Earlier, health officials explained that one of the people being monitored is the original nurse's assistant's husband, who faces a high risk of infection and had no protection. Another is a suspected case in a man who traveled overseas and has tested negative twice. The fourth, a nurse, is not a suspected case but has been brought in as a precaution after suffering diarrhea. She was exposed, but she was wearing protective gear, Arnalis said. Thirty people from Carlos III Hospital and 22 others from Alcorcon hospital plus family members are being monitored, according to authorities. It was not immediately known whether the nurse's assistant hospitalized late Tuesday was one of these 30 contacts at Carlos III Hospital. The hospital will not release information about the status of the nurse's assistant, who has not been named, in order to respect her privacy, director Rafael Santamaria said. The hospital has two potential treatments at its disposal, said Dr. Jose Ramon Arribas, one using an IV drip with the antibodies of Ebola survivors and the other an antiviral drug. "This is a treatment that the WHO (World Health Organization) has recommended, even though they haven't verified its efficacy," he said of the IV drip. EU We need to know what happened Spanish authorities have said that all the proper protocols and procedures were followed in the care of the two missionaries. But the European Union has asked for an explanation as to how the woman was infected. European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said on Tuesday that "Spain told us all the protocols have been followed, but obviously something wrong happened." There have been 10 evacuations of Ebola infected patients from Africa to Europe, eight of those within the European Union, Vincent said and it is first time that something like this has happened. "The hospitals where the patients are being taken are supposed to be equipped and ready to deal with Ebola patients," he said. "If protocols are being followed, it's highly unlikely that an outbreak could happen in the EU. But again, zero risk doesn't exist, particularly in a hospital, where staff deal with sick people. "We need to find out as soon as possible what happened and if we need to revise procedures." There will be an extra meeting of European officials to discuss the Spanish Ebola case on Wednesday, he said. The World Health Organization said it was "ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required," as it investigates the case and traces the infected woman's contacts. In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron will lead a Cabinet meeting to discuss way to coordinate how to handle response to Ebola there, if it's necessary. Cameron called Sierra Leone President Ernest Bai Koroma to discuss the status of the outbreak in the West African nation and talk about how aid the UK has provided is helping. According to Downing Street, the Sierra Leone leader said the situation continues to be "very serious" and there was a need to train more medical staff, improve burial processes and develop a better system for running service treatment centers. Unions question equipment used Some Spanish unions have blamed the government, saying they warned it that the personal protective equipment used by the medical team was not of the highest standard. Angry doctors and nurses outside the Carlos III Hospital where the nurse's assistant is being treated and where the two missionaries were cared for before her said they were outraged the pair had been brought to the hospital, one in August and the other in September. Ebola drugs in the works They said that the two priests, Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia Viejo, were almost dead when they arrived, and that they should not have been brought back to Spain, thereby putting other people's lives at risk. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato announced Monday that testing had confirmed the nurse's assistant has the virus. The husband of the nurse's assistant, who is under observation, is not sick, a spokesman for the Health Ministry said. It was not clear whether he is under quarantine. The couple have no children. The assistant was one of about 30 health professionals in Spain who helped treat the Ebola patients. They and the ambulance team that took her to the hospital are now reportedly under observation. No word on where she took her vacation Health officials said the assistant developed symptoms on September 30. She was not hospitalized until this week, when her only symptom was a fever. She was first taken to a hospital in southern Madrid before being transferred to Carlos III Hospital, where she had helped care for the Ebola patients. The second of the missionaries died on September 26, and she went on vacation a day later, health officials said. They have not said where that vacation was taken. A few days later, she reported that she was not feeling well but her temperatures were not very high, officials said. It was only several days later that her temperature soared and she was hospitalized. An investigation is underway to find everyone the assistant may have had contact with while infectious. So far, there are no other known related cases. Health authorities have urged people to stay calm, as they hope that the virus' spread is contained. "We are working in coordination to give the best care to the patient and to guarantee the safety of all citizens," said Mato, the health minister. Obama National security priority The news came amid growing fears in the United States that the disease could spread. The first person to be diagnosed in the United States with Ebola, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical but stable condition in Texas, according to Candace White, a spokeswoman for Texas Health. He is on a ventilator and receiving kidney dialysis, she said, adding that his liver function, which declined over the weekend, has improved. He is continuing to receive an investigational medication, White said. During a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention press conference on Monday, CNN asked Texas Department of State Health Services Dr. David Lakey how care protocols in Spain compared to those involving Duncan in Texas. Lakey said he personally went to the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital ward in Dallas where the patient is being treated, and saw that there was extensive security and a detailed method of how providers were protecting themselves. "They take this really seriously," he said, describing treatment protocol as "meticulous." CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said none of the people who Duncan came into contact with before his diagnosis that the CDC has identified for monitoring has shown symptoms. Frieden also said the agency has not made final decisions about possible ways to screen at airports in the United States. Meanwhile, some of the U.S. military personnel being deployed to Liberia to help tackle the Ebola crisis may come into contact with the virus, a Pentagon official said Tuesday. The head of U.S. Africa Command, Gen. David Rodriguez, said that while the majority of U.S. troops involved in the mission would not be exposed to the disease, those in mobile testing labs could have contact in that environment. "They're all trained at a very, very high level," Rodriguez told reporters of the lab personnel, who constitute a "separate, specialty element of the force." President Obama told reporters Monday, "As I've said from the start of this outbreak, I consider this a top national security priority. This is not just a matter of charity. ... This is an issue about our safety." Obama called for protocols to help stop the spread of the disease, including additional air passenger screening, while downplaying the risk of an epidemic in the United States. In Liberia, Ebola is killing Thomas Duncan's neighbors Ebola has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, with more than 7,400 suspected, probable and confirmed cases. The virus is transmitted through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, feces and vomit. The incubation period, from the time of infection to symptoms, is two to 21 days. CNN's Al Goodman reported from Madrid, and Laura Smith Spark wrote in London. CNN's Laura Perez Maestro, Marilia Brocchetto and Nick Thompson contributed to this report.
After two Spanish Ebola victims, another case of the deadly disease has been reported in Spain. This time the victim is a Spanish nurse who was treating the earlier two two Ebola victims at a Madrid hospital. She is the first person to contract the virus outside of Africa, confirmed health officials. Earlier, Miguel Pajares, 75 year old... Continue reading
Share Madrid (AFP) Doctors in Spain hospitalised four more people and rushed to identify dozens of others at risk on Tuesday after a nurse was infected with the deadly Ebola virus, raising fears of contagion in Europe. The European Union demanded answers about how the disease spread in a specialised disease unit, while health staff protested over safety failures. The nurse was identified by Spanish media as Teresa Romero, a woman in her forties who worked at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital. She became the first person to contract the disease outside Africa after caring for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus following their return from West Africa where the disease has killed nearly 3,500 people. Officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with before being isolated on Monday. They were monitoring 52 people mostly health staff. "It would be very naive to think that there is no possibility of contagion," the government's health emergencies coordinator Fernando Simon told Cadena Ser radio. Doctors at the hospital said her husband was also at "high risk" and was put in isolation. Another "suspect case" a Spanish engineer recently returned from Nigeria was also being monitored. Another two patients were colleagues of the nurse. One of them was taken in for observation after suffering from diarrhoea, the hospital said. The other is a nurse who was in contact with the infected healthworker, Spanish newspaper El Pais reported, adding that she was hospitalised by precaution as she was running a mild fever. Risk of contagion The infected nurse treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who contracted Ebola in Liberia and died on August 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on September 25. She is believed to have caught the virus while caring for Garcia Viejo. The European Commission has written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation. "There is obviously a problem somewhere," Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said, at a time when all EU member states are supposed to have taken measures to prevent an Ebola outbreak. However Peter Piot, one of the scientists who discovered Ebola, said while the disease posed a threat to healthcare workers around the world, there was "no risk that I see for outbreaks" in developed countries. Spanish government officials said the nurse began to feel ill on September 30 while on leave after treating the two missionaries, but was not admitted to hospital until five days later. Health workers' unions said the nurse had called the Carlos III hospital when she felt ill but was first referred back to a local health centre. The hospital's director, Rafael Perez Santamarina, said she was not admitted at that time because she did not yet have a high fever or other Ebola symptoms. The nurse's husband, named as Javier Limon by the Spanish press, told El Mundo newspaper she "did everything they told her" when she reported feeling ill. He also vowed to fight an order by Madrid health authorities to kill their dog Excalibur over health concerns and drew the backing of animal rights groups. Medical staff protested outside the main site of La Paz hospital in their white coats, yelling for Health Minister Ana Mato to resign. Health worker unions complained staff had not been adequately trained. "We do not have the infrastructure to tackle a virus like this," said Elena Moral, leader of the CSIF AGCM union. Western response The EU announced it start airlifting 100 tonnes of relief aid on Friday to Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea including personal protection equipment like masks, gloves and medicines. Dozens of British troops are due to fly to Sierra Leone next week to help build medical facilities. British Prime Minister David Cameron will also hold an emergency meeting Wednesday to coordinate his country's response to the outbreak, his office said. The head of the US military's Africa Command, General David Rodriguez, said American troops deployed to west Africa could stay there for up to a year. Ebola causes severe fever, vomiting, diarrhoea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. It spreads through contact and bodily fluids. There is no vaccine and no widely available cure, but one treatment, dubbed ZMapp, has shown promising early results and has been fast tracked for mass production. Some 3,439 people have died out of 7,478 cases in the current outbreak across five west African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal according to the latest WHO tally. Patients have been treated for the disease in Europe and the United States, but until now all the cases stemmed from people who caught the virus in west Africa. Late Tuesday, an American physician who was hospitalised in the United States after being exposed to the virus in Sierra Leone was cleared to return home to continue a 21 day observation period, after his fever abated. European markets fell on news of the Spanish infection while the International Monetary Fund warned that economic damage from the Ebola outbreak could spread beyond west Africa and become global.
Madrid (AFP) Doctors in Spain hospitalised four more people and rushed to identify dozens of others at risk on Tuesday after a nurse was infected with the deadly Ebola virus, raising fears of contagion in Europe. The European Union demanded answers about how the disease spread in a specialised disease unit, while health staff protested over safety failures. The nurse was identified by Spanish media as Teresa Romero, a woman in her forties who worked at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital. She became the first person to contract the disease outside Africa after caring for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus following their return from West Africa where the disease has killed nearly 3,500 people. Officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with before being isolated on Monday. They were monitoring 52 people mostly health staff. "It would be very naive to think that there is no possibility of contagion," the government's health emergencies coordinator Fernando Simon told Cadena Ser radio. Doctors at the hospital said her husband was also at "high risk" and was put in isolation. Another "suspect case" a Spanish engineer recently returned from Nigeria was also being monitored. Another two patients were colleagues of the nurse. One of them was taken in for observation after suffering from diarrhoea, the hospital said. The other is a nurse who was in contact with the infected healthworker, Spanish newspaper El Pais reported, adding that she was hospitalised by precaution as she was running a mild fever. The infected nurse treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who contracted Ebola in Liberia and died on August 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on September 25. She is believed to have caught the virus while caring for Garcia Viejo. The European Commission has written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation. "There is obviously a problem somewhere," Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said, at a time when all EU member states are supposed to have taken measures to prevent an Ebola outbreak. However Peter Piot, one of the scientists who discovered Ebola, said while the disease posed a threat to healthcare workers around the world, there was "no risk that I see for outbreaks" in developed countries. Spanish government officials said the nurse began to feel ill on September 30 while on leave after treating the two missionaries, but was not admitted to hospital until five days later. Health workers' unions said the nurse had called the Carlos III hospital when she felt ill but was first referred back to a local health centre. The hospital's director, Rafael Perez Santamarina, said she was not admitted at that time because she did not yet have a high fever or other Ebola symptoms. The nurse's husband, named as Javier Limon by the Spanish press, told El Mundo newspaper she "did everything they told her" when she reported feeling ill. He also vowed to fight an order by Madrid health authorities to kill their dog Excalibur over health concerns and drew the backing of animal rights groups. Medical staff protested outside the main site of La Paz hospital in their white coats, yelling for Health Minister Ana Mato to resign. Health worker unions complained staff had not been adequately trained. "We do not have the infrastructure to tackle a virus like this," said Elena Moral, leader of the CSIF AGCM union. The EU announced it start airlifting 100 tonnes of relief aid on Friday to Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea including personal protection equipment like masks, gloves and medicines. Dozens of British troops are due to fly to Sierra Leone next week to help build medical facilities. British Prime Minister David Cameron will also hold an emergency meeting Wednesday to coordinate his country's response to the outbreak, his office said. The head of the US military's Africa Command, General David Rodriguez, said American troops deployed to west Africa could stay there for up to a year. Ebola causes severe fever, vomiting, diarrhoea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. It spreads through contact and bodily fluids. There is no vaccine and no widely available cure, but one treatment, dubbed ZMapp, has shown promising early results and has been fast tracked for mass production. Some 3,439 people have died out of 7,478 cases in the current outbreak across five west African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal according to the latest WHO tally. Patients have been treated for the disease in Europe and the United States, but until now all the cases stemmed from people who caught the virus in west Africa. Late Tuesday, an American physician who was hospitalised in the United States after being exposed to the virus in Sierra Leone was cleared to return home to continue a 21 day observation period, after his fever abated. European markets fell on news of the Spanish infection while the International Monetary Fund warned that economic damage from the Ebola outbreak could spread beyond west Africa and become global.
MADRID (Reuters) Four people have been hospitalised in Spain to try to stem the spread of Ebola after a Spanish nurse became the first person in the world known to have contracted the virus outside of Africa, health authorities said on Tuesday. The nurse, who tested positive for the virus on Monday, her husband, who is showing no symptoms of the disease, and two other people are being closely monitored in hospital, health officials told a news conference in Madrid. One of those hospitalised is a health worker who has diarrhoea but no fever. The other is a Spaniard who travelled from Nigeria, said Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital where the infected nurse treated two Spanish missionaries who contracted the disease in Africa. With concerns growing around the world of the Ebola pandemic spreading beyond West Africa, the Spanish officials sought to reassure the public that they were tackling the threat. Twenty two people who came into contact with the nurse are being monitored, Perez Santamaria said. They have not been isolated but they are having their temperature taken twice a day to check for signs of infection. Officials said they were still investigating how the nurse was infected. She went on holiday after the second of the missionaries she had been caring for died on Sept. 25, although, they stressed, she had not left Madrid. She began feeling ill on Sept. 30 and was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday. "This has taken us by surprise," said Perez Santamaria. "We are revising our protocols, improving them." A spokesman for the European Commission said the case would be discussed at an EU Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. Jonathan Ball, a professor of molecular virology at Britain's University of Nottingham, said the nurse should not have contracted the deadly disease if appropriate containment and control measures had been taken. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again," he told Reuters. The nurse is being treated with antibodies from previous infected patients, Perez Santamaria said.
MADRID Doctors in Spain hospitalised four more people and rushed to identify dozens of others at risk on Tuesday after a nurse was infected with the deadly Ebola virus, raising fears of contagion in Europe. The European Union demanded answers about how the disease spread in a specialised disease unit, while health staff protested over safety failures. The nurse was identified by Spanish media as Teresa Romero, a woman in her forties who worked at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital. She became the first person to contract the disease outside Africa after caring for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus following their return from West Africa where the disease has killed nearly 3,500 people. Officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with before being isolated on Monday. They were monitoring 52 people mostly health staff. "It would be very naive to think that there is no possibility of contagion," the government's health emergencies coordinator Fernando Simon told Cadena Ser radio. Doctors at the hospital said her husband was also at "high risk" and was put in isolation. Another "suspect case" a Spanish engineer recently returned from Nigeria was also being monitored. Another two patients were colleagues of the nurse. One of them was taken in for observation after suffering from diarrhoea, the hospital said. The other is a nurse who was in contact with the infected healthworker, Spanish newspaper El Pais reported, adding that she was hospitalised by precaution as she was running a mild fever. The infected nurse treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who contracted Ebola in Liberia and died on August 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on September 25. She is believed to have caught the virus while caring for Garcia Viejo. The European Commission has written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation. "There is obviously a problem somewhere," Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said, at a time when all EU member states are supposed to have taken measures to prevent an Ebola outbreak. However Peter Piot, one of the scientists who discovered Ebola, said while the disease posed a threat to healthcare workers around the world, there was "no risk that I see for outbreaks" in developed countries. Spanish government officials said the nurse began to feel ill on September 30 while on leave after treating the two missionaries, but was not admitted to hospital until five days later. Health workers' unions said the nurse had called the Carlos III hospital when she felt ill but was first referred back to a local health centre. The hospital's director, Rafael Perez Santamarina, said she was not admitted at that time because she did not yet have a high fever or other Ebola symptoms. The nurse's husband, named as Javier Limon by the Spanish press, told El Mundo newspaper she "did everything they told her" when she reported feeling ill. He also vowed to fight an order by Madrid health authorities to kill their dog Excalibur over health concerns and drew the backing of animal rights groups. Medical staff protested outside the main site of La Paz hospital in their white coats, yelling for Health Minister Ana Mato to resign. Health worker unions complained staff had not been adequately trained. "We do not have the infrastructure to tackle a virus like this," said Elena Moral, leader of the CSIF AGCM union. The EU announced it start airlifting 100 tonnes of relief aid on Friday to Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea including personal protection equipment like masks, gloves and medicines. The head of the US military's Africa Command, General David Rodriguez, said American troops deployed to west Africa could stay there for up to a year. Ebola causes severe fever, vomiting, diarrhoea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. It spreads through contact and bodily fluids. There is no vaccine and no widely available cure, but one treatment, dubbed ZMapp, has shown promising early results and has been fast tracked for mass production. Some 3,439 people have died out of 7,478 cases in the current outbreak across five west African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal according to the latest WHO tally. Patients have been treated for the disease in Europe and the United States, but until now all the cases stemmed from people who caught the virus in west Africa. Late Tuesday, an American physician who was hospitalised in the United States after being exposed to the virus in Sierra Leone was cleared to return home to continue a 21 day observation period, after his fever abated. Madrid's IBEX 35 stock index closed 2.02 percent lower and other European markets also fell on news of the infection, with travel and tourism groups hit hard. The International Monetary Fund warned in a report on Tuesday that economic damage from the Ebola outbreak could spread beyond west Africa and become global.
MADRID, Oct 08, 2014 (AFP) Doctors in Spain hospitalised four more people and rushed to identify dozens of others at risk on Tuesday after a nurse was infected with the deadly Ebola virus, raising fears of contagion in Europe. The European Union demanded answers about how the disease spread in a specialised disease unit, while health staff protested over safety failures. The nurse was identified by Spanish media as Teresa Romero, a woman in her forties who worked at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital. She became the first person to contract the disease outside Africa after caring for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus following their return from West Africa where the disease has killed nearly 3,500 people. Officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with before being isolated on Monday. They were monitoring 52 people mostly health staff. "It would be very naive to think that there is no possibility of contagion," the government's health emergencies coordinator Fernando Simon told Cadena Ser radio. Doctors at the hospital said her husband was also at "high risk" and was put in isolation. Another "suspect case" a Spanish engineer recently returned from Nigeria was also being monitored. Another two patients were colleagues of the nurse. One of them was taken in for observation after suffering from diarrhoea, the hospital said. The other is a nurse who was in contact with the infected healthworker, Spanish newspaper El Pais reported, adding that she was hospitalised by precaution as she was running a mild fever. Risk of contagion The infected nurse treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who contracted Ebola in Liberia and died on August 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on September 25. She is believed to have caught the virus while caring for Garcia Viejo. The European Commission has written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation. "There is obviously a problem somewhere," Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said, at a time when all EU member states are supposed to have taken measures to prevent an Ebola outbreak. However Peter Piot, one of the scientists who discovered Ebola, said while the disease posed a threat to healthcare workers around the world, there was "no risk that I see for outbreaks" in developed countries. Spanish government officials said the nurse began to feel ill on September 30 while on leave after treating the two missionaries, but was not admitted to hospital until five days later. Health workers' unions said the nurse had called the Carlos III hospital when she felt ill but was first referred back to a local health centre. The hospital's director, Rafael Perez Santamarina, said she was not admitted at that time because she did not yet have a high fever or other Ebola symptoms. The nurse's husband, named as Javier Limon by the Spanish press, told El Mundo newspaper she "did everything they told her" when she reported feeling ill. He also vowed to fight an order by Madrid health authorities to kill their dog Excalibur over health concerns and drew the backing of animal rights groups. Medical staff protested outside the main site of La Paz hospital in their white coats, yelling for Health Minister Ana Mato to resign. Health worker unions complained staff had not been adequately trained. "We do not have the infrastructure to tackle a virus like this," said Elena Moral, leader of the CSIF AGCM union. Western response The EU announced it start airlifting 100 tonnes of relief aid on Friday to Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea including personal protection equipment like masks, gloves and medicines. Dozens of British troops are due to fly to Sierra Leone next week to help build medical facilities. British Prime Minister David Cameron will also hold an emergency meeting Wednesday to coordinate his country's response to the outbreak, his office said. The head of the US military's Africa Command, General David Rodriguez, said American troops deployed to west Africa could stay there for up to a year. Ebola causes severe fever, vomiting, diarrhoea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. It spreads through contact and bodily fluids. There is no vaccine and no widely available cure, but one treatment, dubbed ZMapp, has shown promising early results and has been fast tracked for mass production. Some 3,439 people have died out of 7,478 cases in the current outbreak across five west African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal according to the latest WHO tally. Patients have been treated for the disease in Europe and the United States, but until now all the cases stemmed from people who caught the virus in west Africa. Late Tuesday, an American physician who was hospitalised in the United States after being exposed to the virus in Sierra Leone was cleared to return home to continue a 21 day observation period, after his fever abated. European markets fell on news of the Spanish infection while the International Monetary Fund warned that economic damage from the Ebola outbreak could spread beyond west Africa and become global.
MADRID (Reuters) A Spanish nurse has become the first person to contract Ebola outside of Africa, casting doubt over measures taken in Spain to control the potential spread of the deadly disease. The nurse had helped to treat two priests who contracted Ebola in Africa and were repatriated to Spain. Some 30 other health workers and those who came in contact with her are now being monitored for symptoms The post Spanish nurse becomes first to contract Ebola outside West Africa appeared first on Firstpost.
Duration 01 14s Published 20 hours ago A nurse being treated for the deadly Ebola virus in Spain has been transferred from one Madrid hospital to another.Spain's health minister announced that the case was the first known transmission of the current outbreak of Ebola outside West Africa. The female nurse had helped treat two Spanish priests repatriated to Madrid after contracting Ebola in West Africa.The nurse is believed to have contracted the virus from one of the priests.She originally went to the Alcorcon hospital with a fever on Sunday and was placed in isolation.She is now in Carlos III Hospital for further treatment.Spanish authorities are looking into how she was infected at a modern hospital with special equipment for helping people with deadly viruses."We are tracing everyone she has been in contact with and checking what contact they had," explained Antonio Alemay, from Madrid's public health system."We need to make sure the correct protection measures were taken, such as isolation, and temperatur
by Alice Monroe Could the deadly Ebola virus spread more easily than so far anticipated? Concerns were raised about the potential further international spread of Ebola after a Spanish nurse was diagnosed with deadly virus at a Madrid hospital on Monday. Health authorities were investigating how the nurse, who was part of a special team that cared for a Spanish priest who died of Ebola last month, contracted the virus despite wearing protective clothing making it the first such infection outside of West Africa. Authorities said they "don't know" how the nurse became infected, and acted quickly to prevent any further spread of the disease by quarantining three people, including the nurse's husband, and monitoring 50 others. Scientists have warned that the deadly virus could spread across the world infecting people from the U.S. to China within three weeks. In the United States, President Obama said officials are working on additional screening protocols for international airline passengers both in West Africa and the United States as his administration is considering new measures on how to prevent the spread of the Ebola virus in the U.S.
The deadly Ebola virus seems to be making its wave around the world as it creeps to Spain for the second time.....The Spanish nurse who treated an Ebola victim in Madrid has become the first person in the world to contract the deadly virus outside of Africa.The 44 year old is said to have spent the last 15 years working at Madrid's Carlos III Hospital, where the two Spanish missionaries infected with Ebola died. The woman, who is married, was part of the team that treated Spanish priest Manuel Garcia Viejo, who was brought back from Africa last month so that he could be treated for the deadly virus.Two separate tests confirmed that the woman, who has yet to be named, had contracted the disease.
A Home Office minister has said Britain should consider introducing screening for Ebola carriers arriving at airports, after a Spanish nurse became the first person to have caught the virus in Europe. President Barack Obama announced that the United States is to monitor traveller for signs they are carrying the virus, warning that containment of Ebola is "a top national security priority". Public Health England said it had no plans to bring in screening for the disease, which has already claimed 3,400 lives in West Africa. Rates of infection are set to increase dramatically. The Home Office also insisted there would be no change of policy. But Norman Baker, a Liberal Democrat minister in the department, described Ebola's arrival in Europe as a "very concerning development" and said the case for increasing screening in airports had to be examined. He said "We need to consider whether existing controls are adequate." The accelerating Ebola crisis will be discussed today at a meeting of Cobra, the Whitehall emergencies committee, which will be chaired by David Cameron. It will examine whether Britain is fully prepared to cope with the virus in this country, as well as what more can be done to tackle its spread in West Africa. According to research from a group of American universities monitoring the spread of the disease, the UK is the third most likely country outside Africa to 'import' Ebola. The Cobra meeting had been arranged before the announcement that a Spanish nurse had contracted Ebola from a patient, but the spread of the virus to Europe will give it extra urgency. Members of one Spanish health workers' trade union claimed the protection suits they had used while handling Ebola cases were not of the highest standard. Spanish health officials have stepped up measures to contain the spread of Ebola, quarantining four people at a Madrid hospital where the nursing assistant became infected and persuading a court that the woman's dog must be put down. She was part of a team caring for a Spanish priest who died of Ebola last month after being evacuated from Sierra Leone.
The missionaries, Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia, were visibly dying upon arriving at Carlos III Hospital in Madrid, frightening and outraging hospital staff who felt the infected priests never should have been allowed to return to Spain. "I can't tell you, I haven't the slightest idea," Ramos told local reporters when asked if she knew how she contracted Ebola from the missionaries, adding she took all the proper precautions and was "not at all" worried about the disease before developing a slight fever on Sept. 30. Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy implored the people of Spain to "keep calm" as the country "fac es a matter that is of international concern." "I would like to ask you to allow the health workers to work. The Spanish health system is one of the best in the world." Ramos told reporters she "feels a little better now" after just over a week of treatment, but her official condition remains unclear as, citing privacy concerns, Carlos III hospital is refusing to release details about Ramos' health.
Spanish health authorities say another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola has tested negative for the deadly disease. The man, a Spaniard who had travelled from Nigeria, was one of several people hospitalised after authorities confirmed yesterday that a Spanish nurse had caught the disease in Madrid. A second nurse was also cleared of Ebola. Five people have been examined in hospital and three have yet to be cleared. The nurse was part of the team that had treated two priests who contracted Ebola in Africa and were repatriated to Spain. Some 30 other health workers and those who came in contact with her are now being monitored for symptoms, Reuters reports. One was Manuel Garcia Viejo who died of Ebola in the hospital Carlos III de Madrid on 25 September. He had caught the virus in Sierra Leone, and was transferred to Spain three days before his death. The second had also worked in West Africa and died shortly after reaching Spain. Manuel Garcia Viejo was kept in isolation during his treatment last month and officials said they followed a strict protocol designed to protect health workers and patients at the hospital. The nurse who has since fallen ill only entered Garcia Viejo's room twice, once after his death, Antonio Alemany, the head of Madrid's primary health care services told a news conference. The nurse went on holiday the day after Mr Viego died and had started to feel sick on 30 September, Mr Alemany said. The health worker is in a stable condition, the official said. Spanish newspaper El Pais said the health worker was admitted to hospital on Monday morning with a high fever. Doctors isolated the emergency treatment room, the report said. Ebola spreads through contact with the bodily fluids of someone who has the virus and the only way to stop an outbreak is to isolate those who are infected. Some 3400 people have died in the outbreak mostly in West Africa. Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia have been hardest hit. There have been nearly 7500 confirmed infections worldwide, with officials saying the figure is likely to be much higher in reality. The first Ebola patient diagnosed in the United States is now receiving an experimental drug for the disease. A spokeswoman for Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas said the drug, called brincidofovir, was developed by Chimerix Inc. The patient, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical but stable condition, the hospital said.
MADRID, October 8 (RIA Novosti) Prime Minister of Spain Mariano Rajoy urged people to remain calm on Wednesday over the Ebola outbreak, while reporting on the first deadly virus case in the country to parliamentarians, reported El Pais. "Let's be careful, let's be calm. I have great confidence in our professionals, we will handle this situation," the prime minister said. Rajoy assured the lawmakers that "the Spanish health system is one of the best in the world" and asked them "to let professionals do their jobs," while admitting that the case is serious. The prime minister also promised "to provide the most transparent information" and said that the most important thing for now is to help all the patients who had contact with the woman who contracted Ebola or the priest who died from the virus in a Spanish hospital. On Monday, a nurse at a hospital in Madrid tested positive for Ebola after treating Spanish priest Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who became infected with the Ebola virus, while serving at a Sierra Leone hospital and subsequently died on September 25. This was the first Ebola case in Europe during the current outbreak. Five more people who may have contracted the disease have been hospitalized but none of them have tested positive for Ebola. The European Commission has demanded that Spain provide an explanation of the first case of the Ebola infection in Europe. So far, Spain has registered two Ebola related deaths since the recent outbreak of the disease in West Africa. In August, 75 year old missionary Miguel Pajares died five days after having been flown to Spain from Liberia with symptoms of Ebola. His treatment with the experimental drug ZMapp was ineffective. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the death toll from the Ebola epidemic has surpassed 3,400, with 7470 infected. There is no officially approved medication for the disease. However, several countries, including Russia, the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada and Japan, are currently working on vaccines.
Doctors in Spain hospitalised four more people and rushed to identify dozens of others at risk on Tuesday after a nurse was infected with the deadly Ebola virus, raising fears of contagion in Europe. The European Union demanded answers about how the disease spread in a specialised disease unit, while health staff protested over safety failures. The nurse was identified by Spanish media as Teresa Romero, a woman in her forties who worked at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital. She became the first person to contract the disease outside Africa after caring for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus following their return from West Africa where the disease has killed nearly 3,500 people. Officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with before being isolated on Monday. They were monitoring 52 people mostly health staff. "It would be very naive to think that there is no possibility of contagion," the government's health emergencies coordinator Fernando Simon told Cadena Ser radio. Doctors at the hospital said her husband was also at "high risk" and was put in isolation. Another "suspect case" a Spanish engineer recently returned from Nigeria was also being monitored. Another two patients were colleagues of the nurse. One of them was taken in for observation after suffering from diarrhoea, the hospital said. The other is a nurse who was in contact with the infected healthworker, Spanish newspaper El Pais reported, adding that she was hospitalised by precaution as she was running a mild fever. Risk of contagion The infected nurse treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who contracted Ebola in Liberia and died on August 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on September 25. She is believed to have caught the virus while caring for Garcia Viejo. The European Commission has written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation. "There is obviously a problem somewhere," Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said, at a time when all EU member states are supposed to have taken measures to prevent an Ebola outbreak. However Peter Piot, one of the scientists who discovered Ebola, said while the disease posed a threat to healthcare workers around the world, there was "no risk that I see for outbreaks" in developed countries. Spanish government officials said the nurse began to feel ill on September 30 while on leave after treating the two missionaries, but was not admitted to hospital until five days later. Health workers' unions said the nurse had called the Carlos III hospital when she felt ill but was first referred back to a local health centre. The hospital's director, Rafael Perez Santamarina, said she was not admitted at that time because she did not yet have a high fever or other Ebola symptoms. The nurse's husband, named as Javier Limon by the Spanish press, told El Mundo newspaper she "did everything they told her" when she reported feeling ill. He also vowed to fight an order by Madrid health authorities to kill their dog Excalibur over health concerns and drew the backing of animal rights groups. Medical staff protested outside the main site of La Paz hospital in their white coats, yelling for Health Minister Ana Mato to resign. Health worker unions complained staff had not been adequately trained. "We do not have the infrastructure to tackle a virus like this," said Elena Moral, leader of the CSIF AGCM union. Western response The EU announced it start airlifting 100 tonnes of relief aid on Friday to Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea including personal protection equipment like masks, gloves and medicines. Dozens of British troops are due to fly to Sierra Leone next week to help build medical facilities. British Prime Minister David Cameron will also hold an emergency meeting Wednesday to coordinate his country's response to the outbreak, his office said. The head of the US military's Africa Command, General David Rodriguez, said American troops deployed to west Africa could stay there for up to a year. Ebola causes severe fever, vomiting, diarrhoea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. It spreads through contact and bodily fluids. There is no vaccine and no widely available cure, but one treatment, dubbed ZMapp, has shown promising early results and has been fast tracked for mass production. Some 3,439 people have died out of 7,478 cases in the current outbreak across five west African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal according to the latest WHO tally. Patients have been treated for the disease in Europe and the United States, but until now all the cases stemmed from people who caught the virus in west Africa. Late Tuesday, an American physician who was hospitalised in the United States after being exposed to the virus in Sierra Leone was cleared to return home to continue a 21 day observation period, after his fever abated. European markets fell on news of the Spanish infection while the International Monetary Fund warned that economic damage from the Ebola outbreak could spread beyond west Africa and become global.
A worker wearing a romper and gloves carries a bag as he enters the apartment building of a Spanish nurse infected with Ebola in Madrid, Spain, Wednesday, Oct. 8, 2014. Three more people were placed under quarantine for Ebola at a Madrid hospital where the Spanish nurse became infected, authorities said Thursday. More than 50 other possible contacts were being monitored. The nurse, who had cared for a Spanish priest who died of Ebola, was the first case of Ebola being transmitted outside of West Africa, where a months long outbreak has killed at least 3,500 people and infected at least twice as many.
The European Commission has called for "explanations" from Spain about the circumstances and possible mistakes made by the healthcare system that led to a nurse's assistant contracting the ebola virus, a spokesperson from Brussels said on Tuesday. "The European Commission sent a message to the Spanish Health Ministry on Monday to ask for explanations about the circumstances that have made this first contagion outside of Africa possible," explained Fr d ric Vincent, who added that they were expecting a response from Spain on Wednesday. "Obviously there is a problem somewhere," the spokesperson concluded. However, Vincent added that the commission was not excessively concerned about the case in Spain, given that the spread of the virus in Europe "continues to be highly improbable." Brussels called on the Spanish authorities on Monday to confirm that one of the health professionals who came into contact with missionary Manuel Garc a Viejo at the Carlos III hospital in Madrid had contracted the virus. The priest died in September after having been repatriated to Spain from Sierra Leone. Brussels stated that Spain would have to "provide explanations" about the details of the contagion. EC sources underlined that European hospitals must be "highly equipped" in order to protect their personnel. Sources consulted by news agency Europa Press explained that the European Union has been "prepared" for some time for the chance that an infection might occur within its borders, but clarified that it would be "nearly impossible" for the disease to spread as it has done in West Africa, where 3,300 people have already died in the latest outbreak.
Spanish health authorities said today that another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola had tested negative for the disease. The man, a Spaniard who had travelled from Nigeria, was one of several people hospitalised after authorities confirmed on Monday that a Spanish nurse had caught the disease in Madrid. A second nurse was also cleared of Ebola. A third nursing assistant was hospitalised late on Tuesday for monitoring, a source at La Paz hospital said bringing the number of people examined in hospital for Ebola to five, two of whom tested negative.
Seriously. Are they mad? A nurse who attended the missionary who died of Ebola in Madrid recently... showed the symptoms of the disease for SIX days before she was diagnosed on Monday. Story at El Mundo here. 'The Spanish health minister has confirmed that a nurse who treated a victim of Ebola in Madrid has tested positive for the disease. The nurse is said to be the first person in the current outbreak known to have contracted Ebola outside Africa. Health Minister Ana Mato said the woman was part of the team that treated Spanish priest Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died of the virus on 25 September...'. From the BBC. 'They've put the entire population at risk', says the nurses association here. El Pa s in English reports that 'The European Commission has called for "explanations" from Spain about the circumstances and possible mistakes made by the healthcare system that led to a nurse's assistant contracting the Ebola virus, a spokesperson from Brussels said on Tuesday...'. Reactions from the foreign press here. Keep up with the Ebola Crisis here.
An ambulance with medical staff wearing protective clothing parks outside of the apartment of the Spanish nurse infected with Ebola as a neighbor stands on her balcony in Madrid, Spain, Wednesday, Oct. 8, 2014. Three more people were placed under quarantine for Ebola at a Madrid hospital where a Spanish nurse became infected, authorities said Thursday. More than 50 other possible contacts were being monitored. The nurse, who had cared for a Spanish priest who died of Ebola, was the first case of Ebola being transmitted outside of West Africa, where a months long outbreak has killed at least 3,500 people and infected at least twice as many. (AP Photo Andres Kudacki)
Spanish police block animal rights activists protesting outside the apartment building of the Spanish nurse who contracted Ebola in the city of Alcorcon, outside Madrid, on Wednesday. Here's a roundup of the latest developments on Ebola. We'll update this post as news happens. In Spain, Teresa Romero Ramos, the nurse who was admitted to a hospital in Madrid after caring for an infected priest who'd returned from West Africa, reportedly told health authorities three times that she had a fever before she was placed in quarantine. The Guardian newspaper cited the Spanish paper El Pais as saying that she first contacted health authorities on Sept. 30. The Guardian writes Reuters quotes Spanish health authorities as saying today that another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola had tested negative for the disease On another note, the husband of the infected nurse has launched an online campaign to save the couple's dog, which authorities had sought to euthanize as a precaution. The Guardian says In Dallas, Thomas Eric Duncan, the man who traveled from Liberia and was diagnosed with the disease in the United States, remains at last report in critical condition. He is being treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital with an experimental drug called brincidofovir. Meanwhile, health officials are watching a group of people who had contact with Duncan after he developed symptoms of the disease but before he was placed in isolation at the hospital. Duncan first sought hospital care on Sept. 25 and was admitted on Sept. 28. Before his hospitalization, 10 of the 48 people being monitored had close contact with him and are being most closely watched. Since the first symptoms of the disease can begin in eight to 10 days after exposure, "this is a very critical week," said Dr. David Lakey, the Texas health commissioner. "We're at a very sensitive period when a contact could develop symptoms. We're monitoring with extreme vigilance." In Freetown, Sierra Leone, burial teams reportedly refused to collect bodies of Ebola victims in the capital and went on strike, apparently demanding more money, though officials there told The Associated Press that the situation has been "resolved." The AP says "In neighboring Liberia, health workers said they planned to strike if their demands for more money and safety equipment were not met by the end of the week." And, in Geneva, the World Bank issued an estimate of the projected cost of the Ebola outbreak, saying it could reach 32.6 billion by the end of 2015 if it spreads significantly beyond worst hit West Africa. "The enormous economic cost of the current outbreak to the affected countries and the world could have been avoided by prudent ongoing investment in health systems strengthening," World Bank President Jim Yong Kim said in a statement.
Spanish police block animal rights activists protesting outside the apartment building of the Spanish nurse who contracted Ebola in the city of Alcorcon, outside Madrid, on Wednesday. Here's a roundup of the latest developments on Ebola. We'll update this post as news happens. In Spain, Teresa Romero Ramos, the nurse who was admitted to a hospital in Madrid after caring for an infected priest who'd returned from West Africa, reportedly told health authorities three times that she had a fever before she was placed in quarantine. The Guardian newspaper cited the Spanish paper El Pais as saying that she first contacted health authorities on Sept. 30. The Guardian writes Reuters quotes Spanish health authorities as saying today that another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola had tested negative for the disease On another note, the husband of the infected nurse has launched an online campaign to save the couple's dog, which authorities had sought to euthanize as a precaution. The Guardian says A social media campaign to save the dog is running with Twitter hashtag excalibur In Dallas, Thomas Eric Duncan, the man who traveled from Liberia and was diagnosed with the disease in the United States, remains at last report in critical condition. He is being treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital with an experimental drug called brincidofovir. Meanwhile, health officials are watching a group of people who had contact with Duncan after he developed symptoms of the disease but before he was placed in isolation at the hospital. Duncan first sought hospital care on Sept. 25 and was admitted on Sept. 28. Before his hospitalization, 10 of the 48 people being monitored had close contact with him and are being most closely watched. Since the first symptoms of the disease can begin in eight to 10 days after exposure, "this is a very critical week," said Dr. David Lakey, the Texas health commissioner. "We're at a very sensitive period when a contact could develop symptoms. We're monitoring with extreme vigilance." In Freetown, Sierra Leone, burial teams reportedly refused to collect bodies of Ebola victims in the capital and went on strike, apparently demanding more money, though officials there told The Associated Press that the situation has been "resolved." The AP says "In neighboring Liberia, health workers said they planned to strike if their demands for more money and safety equipment were not met by the end of the week." And, in Geneva, the World Bank issued an estimate of the projected cost of the Ebola outbreak, saying it could reach 32.6 billion by the end of 2015 if it spreads significantly beyond worst hit West Africa. "The enormous economic cost of the current outbreak to the affected countries and the world could have been avoided by prudent ongoing investment in health systems strengthening," World Bank President Jim Yong Kim said in a statement.
Spanish police block animal rights activists protesting outside the apartment building of the Spanish nurse who contracted Ebola in the city of Alcorcon, outside Madrid, on Wednesday. Here's a roundup of the latest developments on Ebola. We'll update this post as news happens. In Spain, Teresa Romero Ramos, the nurse who was admitted to a hospital in Madrid after caring for an infected priest who'd returned from West Africa, reportedly told health authorities three times that she had a fever before she was placed in quarantine. There were also reports that she may have become infected by touching gloves to her face while she was removing a protective suit she wore while caring for an Ebola patient. Meanwhile, despite an appeal from Romero's husband, protests in the streets of Madrid and and online campaign to save the couple's dog, El Mundo newspaper reports that Excalibur was put down at a veterinary hospital in the capital. Ealrier, The Guardian reported A social media campaign to save the dog had been running with the Twitter hashtag excalibur The Guardian newspaper cited the Spanish paper El Pais as saying that she first contacted health authorities on Sept. 30. The Guardian writes Reuters quotes Spanish health authorities as saying today that another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola had tested negative for the disease The chief medical officer at La Paz University Hospital, Dr. German Ramirez, was quoted in El Mundo as saying that Romero contracted Ebola when she touched her face with gloves she had used in the room where she was treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, a priest who had worked in Liberia. Viejo later died from the diseases. In Dallas, Thomas Eric Duncan, the man who traveled from Liberia and was diagnosed with the disease in the United States, remains at last report in critical condition. He is being treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital with an experimental drug called brincidofovir. Meanwhile, health officials are watching a group of people who had contact with Duncan after he developed symptoms of the disease but before he was placed in isolation at the hospital. Duncan first sought hospital care on Sept. 25 and was admitted on Sept. 28. Before his hospitalization, 10 of the 48 people being monitored had close contact with him and are being most closely watched. Since the first symptoms of the disease can begin in eight to 10 days after exposure, "this is a very critical week," said Dr. David Lakey, the Texas health commissioner. "We're at a very sensitive period when a contact could develop symptoms. We're monitoring with extreme vigilance." In Freetown, Sierra Leone, burial teams reportedly refused to collect bodies of Ebola victims in the capital and went on strike, apparently demanding more money, though officials there told The Associated Press that the situation has been "resolved." The AP says "In neighboring Liberia, health workers said they planned to strike if their demands for more money and safety equipment were not met by the end of the week." And, in Geneva, the World Bank issued an estimate of the projected cost of the Ebola outbreak, saying it could reach 32.6 billion by the end of 2015 if it spreads significantly beyond worst hit West Africa. "The enormous economic cost of the current outbreak to the affected countries and the world could have been avoided by prudent ongoing investment in health systems strengthening," World Bank President Jim Yong Kim said in a statement.
Spanish police block animal rights activists protesting Wednesday outside the apartment building of the Spanish nurse who contracted Ebola in the city of Alcorcon, outside Madrid. Here's a roundup of the latest developments on Ebola. We'll update this post as news happens. In Spain, Teresa Romero Ramos, the nurse who was admitted to a hospital in Madrid after caring for an infected priest who'd returned from West Africa, reportedly told health authorities three times that she had a fever before she was placed in quarantine. There were also reports that she may have become infected by touching gloves to her face while she was removing a protective suit she wore while caring for an Ebola patient. Meanwhile, despite an appeal from Romero's husband, protests in the streets of Madrid and an online campaign to save the couple's dog, El Mundo newspaper reports that Excalibur was put down at a veterinary hospital in the capital. There was no independent verification of the newspaper report. Earlier, The Guardian reported A social media campaign to save the dog had been running with the Twitter hashtag excalibur The Guardian newspaper cited the Spanish paper El Pais as saying that the nurse first contacted health authorities on Sept. 30. The Guardian writes Reuters quotes Spanish health authorities as saying today that another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola had tested negative for the disease The chief medical officer at La Paz University Hospital, Dr. German Ramirez, was quoted in El Mundo as saying that Romero contracted Ebola when she touched her face with gloves she had used in the room where she was treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, a priest who had worked in Liberia. Viejo later died from the disease. In Dallas, Thomas Eric Duncan, the man who traveled from Liberia and was diagnosed with the disease in the United States, remains at last report in critical condition. He is being treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital with an experimental drug called brincidofovir. Meanwhile, health officials are watching a group of people who had contact with Duncan after he developed symptoms of the disease but before he was placed in isolation at the hospital. Duncan first sought hospital care on Sept. 25 and was admitted on Sept. 28. Before his hospitalization, 10 of the 48 people being monitored had close contact with him and are being most closely watched. Since the first symptoms of the disease can begin in eight to 10 days after exposure, "this is a very critical week," said Dr. David Lakey, the Texas health commissioner. "We're at a very sensitive period when a contact could develop symptoms. We're monitoring with extreme vigilance." In Freetown, Sierra Leone, burial teams reportedly refused to collect bodies of Ebola victims in the capital and went on strike, apparently demanding more money, though officials there told The Associated Press that the situation has been "resolved." The AP says "In neighboring Liberia, health workers said they planned to strike if their demands for more money and safety equipment were not met by the end of the week." And in Geneva, the World Bank issued an estimate of the projected cost of the Ebola outbreak, saying it could reach 32.6 billion by the end of 2015 if the virus spreads significantly beyond worst hit West Africa. "The enormous economic cost of the current outbreak to the affected countries and the world could have been avoided by prudent ongoing investment in health systems strengthening," World Bank President Jim Yong Kim said in a statement.
The Spanish government is under pressure to guarantee the safety of its citizens after a nurse contracted the Ebola virus, the first positive diagnosis in Western Europe. Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy faced questions in the Spanish parliament "The first objective is to attend to the people infected with the disease. There is one case for the moment. The second objective is to monitor all the people that have been in contact with her. Thirdly we need to investigate why and how this infection happened. And fourthly we must explain the situation to the public. What I ask now is that we let the professionals continue their work," said Rahoy. The infected health care worker is said to be in a stable condition.
Investigations are under way at a hospital in Madrid after a Spanish nurse became the first person known to have contracted the deadly Ebola virus outside West Africa. The nurse had treated two Spanish missionaries who died of the disease after being flown home from the region. Three other people, including the nurse's husband, have been quarantined. The European Commission has asked Spain to explain how the nurse could have become infected. Some 3,400 people have died in the outbreak mostly in West Africa. The Spanish auxiliary nurse, a 40 year old woman who has not been na...
Spanish police block animal rights activists protesting Wednesday outside the apartment building of the Spanish nurse who contracted Ebola in the city of Alcorcon, outside Madrid. Here's a roundup of the latest developments on Ebola. We'll update this post as news happens. In Spain, Teresa Romero Ramos, the nurse who was admitted to a hospital in Madrid after caring for an infected priest who'd returned from West Africa, reportedly told health authorities three times that she had a fever before she was placed in quarantine. There were also reports that she may have become infected by touching gloves to her face while she was removing a protective suit she wore while caring for an Ebola patient. Meanwhile, El Mundo, which reported earlier that the dog belonging to Romero and her husband had been euthanized as a precaution, has now backtracked on that story, saying the that Excalibur is still alive. Earlier, The Guardian reported A social media campaign to save the dog has running with the Twitter hashtag excalibur The Guardian newspaper cited the Spanish paper El Pais as saying that the nurse first contacted health authorities on Sept. 30. The Guardian writes Reuters quotes Spanish health authorities as saying today that another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola had tested negative for the disease The chief medical officer at La Paz University Hospital, Dr. German Ramirez, was quoted in El Mundo as saying that Romero contracted Ebola when she touched her face with gloves she had used in the room where she was treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, a priest who had worked in Liberia. Viejo later died from the disease. In Dallas, as we reported in another post, Thomas Eric Duncan, the man who traveled from Liberia and was diagnosed with the disease in the United States, has died at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital. Hospital officials say Duncan "succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola" this morning. In a statement, the hospital said "He fought courageously in this battle. Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time." Meanwhile, health officials are watching a group of people who had contact with Duncan after he developed symptoms of the disease but before he was placed in isolation at the hospital. Duncan first sought hospital care on Sept. 25 and was admitted on Sept. 28. Before his hospitalization, 10 of the 48 people being monitored had close contact with him and are being most closely watched. Since the first symptoms of the disease can begin in eight to 10 days after exposure, "this is a very critical week," said Dr. David Lakey, the Texas health commissioner. "We're at a very sensitive period when a contact could develop symptoms. We're monitoring with extreme vigilance." In Omaha, Neb., a freelance cameraman, Ashoka Mukpo, who contracted Ebola in West Africa and is being treated at Nebraska Medical Center, will reportedly receive blood donated by Dr. Kent Brantly, who earlier survived the disease. Antibodies against Ebola in Brantly's blood could help Mukpo fight off the infection, officials say. In Freetown, Sierra Leone, burial teams reportedly refused to collect bodies of Ebola victims in the capital and went on strike, apparently demanding more money, though officials there told The Associated Press that the situation has been "resolved." The AP says "In neighboring Liberia, health workers said they planned to strike if their demands for more money and safety equipment were not met by the end of the week." And in Geneva, the World Bank issued an estimate of the projected cost of the Ebola outbreak, saying it could reach 32.6 billion by the end of 2015 if the virus spreads significantly beyond worst hit West Africa. "The enormous economic cost of the current outbreak to the affected countries and the world could have been avoided by prudent ongoing investment in health systems strengthening," World Bank President Jim Yong Kim said in a statement.
There is something depressing about the fact that it has taken a sick Spanish nurse to put Ebola back on the front pages. Since the summer, some 3,400 West Africans have died, but interest in the story here had waned. So long as the disease did not make the nine mile leap across the Straits of Gibraltar, the moat which keeps all nasty things from Africa at bay from fortress Europe, a sense developed that it could quietly be forgotten or left to the aid charities. No longer. Spain's public health authorities are investigating how a nurse who treated two missionaries in a Madrid hospital who had contracted the disease in Liberia and Sierra Leone became infected in spite of the protective clothing she was wearing. The nurse had been on holiday since treating the now deceased missionaries and it is not clear where she had gone, but it seems likely that she contracted the illness through an as yet unidentified breach in the barrier nursing techniques used to treat patients. We have become used to these panics in recent years. Sars and bird flu were both grimly forecast to cause mass fatalities. Six years ago, the government rather hysterically warned that the next pandemic would cost up to 750,000 lives in Britain and 50 million worldwide. 'Socio economic disruption will be massive,' it concluded. But we have, so far, been spared. Until July this year just 393 people worldwide have died of bird flu, not one of them in Britain. Ebola has already proved more deadly than bird flu or Sars (which has killed 775 people worldwide). Yet apocalyptic forecasts are again likely to prove wide of the mark. We are not 'overdue' a global pandemic of infectious disease, as Professor Roy Anderson, chief scientist at the Ministry of Defence, put it in 2005. They are not like hurricanes. The world, and the developed world in particular, is now largely free of the major outbreaks of infectious disease which have punctuated history not through luck but because we have become much better at controlling them. What we cannot treat through inoculation we have become extremely good at containing through palliative care. Ebola, the current outbreak of which has a mortality rate of 70 per cent, is about as lethal a disease as can be. It still has no cure. But there has been a procedure for isolating and treating it in operation since 1976, when a government scientist at Porton Down accidentally pricked his finger and gave himself the disease. He survived, as did the British nurse William Pooley, who recently contracted the disease while working in Sierra Leone. In neither case was anyone else infected. If cases do arise in Britain there will inevitably be deaths, but there is little reason to believe that the outcome will not be the same successful containment. The idea of Britons being infected en masse is fanciful the disease is not airborne and spreads through contact of bodily fluids only. All this ought to be self evident, yet it is lost on those who prefer to see outbreaks of infectious disease as some kind of payback for modern lifestyles. Typifying this attitude, an organisation called the Eco Health Alliance claimed last week that Ebola is a product of 'deforestation, travel and trade' all the evils of global capitalism, in other words. Other than the obvious that human travel takes a disease to places it would not otherwise go it is utter nonsense. Global capitalism has not put us under greater threat of infectious disease. Quite the opposite it has fuelled the economic growth which pays for hospitals of developed world standards and for the sanitation which prevents spread of infectious disease. Similar claims were made at the beginning of the railway age that rapid travel would spread all kinds of disease around the country. We know what followed a century and a half in which infectious disease was all but eliminated as a major killer in Britain. So long as developing countries are allowed to prosper and to adopt western lifestyles they will enjoy the same transformation. It is just a tragedy that so many of those who claim to speak on behalf of the world's poor seem intent on interrupting that process and keeping the greater part of the Earth's population in a state of noble and deadly peasanthood. Does the green movement seriously think that the lives of West Africans would be improved by curtailing travel and trade, and by prohibiting agricultural improvement and other development in forested areas? It is as well that the same attitude did not prevail in Anglo Saxon England, when much of the countryside here was deforested. We are seldom impressed with the Department for International Development's activities they too often feed green ideology by pouring money into projects that keep poor societies dependent on subsistence farming. But its latest project we enthusiastically endorse the construction of a 92 bed hospital in Sierra Leone, along with generators and incinerators, which will bring something approaching western standard nursing to the country as it confronts Ebola. This is exactly what aid should be about pouring in resources in times of crisis. Quite apart from the humanitarian aspect which on its own would make the project worthwhile it is obviously in our interests to tackle the threats posed by infectious disease at their source. Fewer hare brained schemes to promote sustainable sharecropping in sub Saharan Africa and more pop up hospitals would make the world a happier and safer place, and set us on the path to the realistic goal of eliminating infectious disease as a major killer worldwide.
Airlines across Europe are monitoring their safety procedures after a nurse in Madrid contracted Ebola, without having set foot in West Africa. Maria Teresa Romero Ramos, 44, contracted the virus after tending to a Spanish missionary, who died from Ebola after working in West Africa. Mrs Romero had never been to the region, making her the first person to catch the disease without having travelled to Africa. And with 30 flights a day arriving in the UK from Madrid where the nurse lived and worked budget airlines are ensuring that their healthcare procedures are rigorously enforced. "Passengers with contagious diseases, if spotted before the flight departs, are usually refused boarding," said one pilot with a low cost airline. "But if we identify it in the air then there are certain procedures we have to follow to isolate them as best as we can." The pilot, who flies regularly around Europe, told The Telegraph that his airline have been informed that crew contact with passengers should be limited so if one crew member has already been in contact with the ill passenger, they would remain as the sole carer of that passenger for the duration of the flight. Aprons and gloves would be worn but that is the limit of the protective equipment available on board. The passenger would be moved to a spare empty row, if possible, and a lavatory would be closed for sole use of the ill traveller. On arrival at the airport, the pilot would have called ahead to request that the duty health officials meet the arriving plane. The guidance is essential given the high number of flights between Madrid and the UK. On Wednesday, 30 flights carrying an estimated 5,000 people arrived at seven airports across the UK. Easyjet operate a number of flights from Madrid daily to Edinburgh, most days to Luton and Liverpool, and four a week to Bristol. They fly into Gatwick five times a day. Ryanair fly into Stansted three times a day, and operates flights from Madrid to Liverpool and Manchester five times a week. A spokesperson for Easyjet said "None of the relevant authorities at any of the airports easyJet operates to have put any extra measures in place relating to the prevention of the spread of Ebola. "If any measures are put in place easyJet would fully comply with them." Ryanair said "Our operations are running as normal, we continue to comply with all regulations. "We have received guidelines from the health authorities and EASA, and will continue to monitor the situation."
One more Spanish health care worker was admitted to hospital for monitoring for Ebola on One more Spanish health care worker was admitted to hospital for monitoring for Ebola on Wednesday, bringing to six the number of hospitalisations in Madrid where a nurse has been infected with the disease, a hospital official said. In the latest case, a nurse was quarantined at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital on Wednesday morning as a precaution, a spokesman for the hospital said. Another nurse had been admitted to the hospital with a fever on Tuesday night and put in quarantine for monitoring, he added, confirming Spanish media reports. Three other people had been placed in quarantine at the hospital for monitoring after a nurse who works there was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday in the first case of transmission of the disease outside of Africa. The woman, identified by Spanish media as Teresa Romero, a woman in her forties, had cared for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus following their return from west Africa. HUSBAND Among the six people hospitalised was the woman's husband, considered at "high risk". Officials said they were monitoring as a precaution 52 other people mostly health staff who had been in contact with the infected nurse. Health Minister Ana Mato said that there were no signs that any of the woman's coworkers had also become infected. "At the moment we have no evidence that any of them have any symptoms," she told journalists as she arrived in parliament on Wednesday. Meanwhile, the World Bank warned today that the Ebola epidemic could deal a 32 billion plus blow to the West African economy over the next year if officials cannot get it under control. If efforts to halt its spread out of a three country core Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea are not successful by December, the entire region faces a real threat of economic catastrophe, the Bank said in a new report. "In broader regional terms, the economic impacts could be limited if immediate national and international responses succeed in containing the epidemic and mitigating aversion behavior," it said. "If, on the other hand, the epidemic spreads into neighbouring countries, some of which have much larger economies, the cumulative two year impact could reach US 32.6 billion by the end of 2015." The disease has so far killed nearly 3,500 people, has already taken a toll on the economy of the three countries, stifling production and consumption. In the best case, Ebola being brought under control by the end of 2014, the Bank says, the economic cost will be about 359 million in the three countries this year and another 129 million next year. For all of West Africa, the cost will run from 3.8 to 9 billion. But in the case that containment comes more slowly in the three core affected countries, and outbreaks surface in neighbouring countries, the costs will soar for all, it said. (AFP)
It has emerged that the nurse, who had helped treat two Spanish missionaries who died after returning from Africa with the disease, first complained of feeling ill a week before she was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday. The 40 year old is understood to have contacted health workers after complaining of a low fever on September 30. She was only given tests for Ebola however when she turned up at hospital with a high fever on Monday, The Telegraph has reported. Spanish Ebola patient, Catholic priest Manuel Garcia Viejo, died after being repatriated from Sierra Leone on 22 September 2014 One of those hospitalised is a health worker who has diarrhoea but no fever. The other is a Spaniard who travelled from Nigeria, said Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital where the infected nurse treated the two Spanish missionaries. Health officials have said 22 people who came into contact with the nurse are also being monitored. They have not been isolated but they are having their temperature taken twice a day to check for signs of infection. The EU has now asked Spain to explain how the nurse contracted the deadly disease, according to an AFP report. The 40 year old nurse, who has not been identified but is said to be in a stable condition, had up to 30 colleagues who also treated the missionaries who died of Ebola at the hospital in Madrid. A spokesman for the European Commission said the case, the first known case of Ebola spreading within a European country, would be discussed at a Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. source independent.co.uk
Madrid Three more health workers in Spain have been admitted to hospital for monitoring for Ebola on Wednesday, including two doctors who had contact with a nurse who has been infected with the disease. The third new patient is a nurse who had contact with one of the two Spanish missionaries who died from Ebola after being repatriated from west Africa for treatment. "He is showing symptoms and a test has been carried out but we have not received the result yet," said a spokesman for the Madrid hospital. Meanwhile, two people who had previously been under observation in hospital have been cleared of the disease and discharged. In total, there are therefore seven people isolated in the Madrid hospital La Paz Carlos III on Wednesday evening the three new patients the infected nurse her husband and two other nurses. The infected nurse, identified by Spanish media as Teresa Romero, had cared for the two elderly missionaries who died from the virus. Officials said they were monitoring as a precaution about 50 other people mostly health staff who had been in contact with the infected nurse. Earlier Wednesday, Health Minister Ana Mato said that there were no signs that any of the woman's coworkers had also become infected. "At the moment we have no evidence that any of them have any symptoms," she told journalists.
(BRUSSELS) The European Union must fill gaps to stop the spread of Ebola now that an infected nurse in Spain has exposed these failings, but it is well armed to prevent an epidemic, EU officials and experts said. Taking into account the level of health and medical standards in Europe, "the situation cannot be compared to what is happening in Africa," said the spokesman for the European health commissioner, Frederic Vincent. "An Ebola epidemic in Europe is highly unlikely. When the security measures are put in place, the risk is checked," Vincent said. Until the Spanish nurse caught the virus, he said, the 28 country EU had only eight cases of Ebola, all of them caregivers who were repatriated from African countries where they took ill. However, a European diplomat said there was still a need to "sound an alarm bell" because there was a flaw that allowed the Spanish nurse to catch the virus from a patient who had returned from Africa. A doctor treating the nurse said she may have become infected with Ebola when she touched her face with a glove as she removed her protective suit after treating an infected missionary. The European Commission, the EU's executive arm, has already drawn a lesson by deciding Wednesday to step up information for travellers and medical staff. The goal is to detect as quickly as possible any accidental entry of people with the disease. European officials do not rule out revising procedures for putting people in hospital and criteria for determining whether or not someone is at risk of having contracted Ebola. Medical staff, an EU expert said, are expected to have rules and material as well as techniques for putting on and removing protective suits. Ebola and pets "But we realise it's not 100 percent effective because few diseases require such precautions to avoid contagion, and the reflexes are not a given," added the expert, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The case of the nurse's family dog, which was put down as a precaution, triggering an uproar from animal rights activists, is far from being just a curiosity. For months, the European Union has been fashioning its response to an eventual outbreak of the disease by identifying the hospitals and staff it would mobilise. But, "to my knowledge, nobody until now has asked himself the question about what to do with pets," he added. "The majority of big countries have equipped themselves with the required measures, but the mesh in the net is still too loose to exclude errors," said Professor Nathan Clumeck, a specialist in infectious diseases at a top Brussels hospital. That is especially the case in countries hit with the biggest spending cuts, such as Greece and Spain, where staff and resources are lacking, Clumeck said. Nevertheless, according to the web site Europolitics, which quoted an internal EU document, Portugal ranks among the countries best equipped to fight Ebola. It has 37 beds in isolation wards, compared to Denmark with 42 beds, Italy with 21 and France with 20 beds. Clumeck said it was "certain that patients will arrive in Europe" but said the region's ability to diagnose and isolate the disease meant there would be no mass outbreak.
Madrid Three more health workers in Spain have been admitted to hospital for monitoring for Ebola on Wednesday, including two doctors who had contact with a nurse who has been infected with the disease.The third new patient is a nurse who had contact with one of the two Spanish missionaries who died from Ebola after being repatriated from west Africa for treatment."He is showing symptoms and a test has been carried out but we have not received the result yet," said a spokesman for the Madrid hospital.Meanwhile, two people who had previously been under observation in hospital have been cleared...
A television cameraman films outside the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid, where a Spanish nurse who contracted Ebola is being treated, October 7, 2014. The Spanish nurse has become the first person to contract Ebola outside of Africa, casting doubt over measures taken in Spain to control the potential spread of the deadly disease. The nurse had helped to treat two priests who contracted Ebola in Africa and were repatriated to Spain. Some 30 other health workers and those who came in contact with her are now being monitored for symptoms. REUTERS Andrea Comas (SPAIN Tags HEALTH SOCIETY DISASTER MEDIA) (File 2014 10 07T105748Z 473541076 GM1EAA71CVB01 RTRMADP 3 HEALTH EBOLA SPAIN.JPG )
Teresa Romero is one of six people being kept in isolation at the Carlos III hospital in Madrid. Spokeswoman Yolanda Fuentes said "Her clinical situation has deteriorated but I can't give any more information due to the express wishes of the patient." The news comes after the Spanish public was outraged as government health workers put down Mrs Romero's dog amid fears it could carry the Ebola virus. The nurse was one of the medical team that treated the two repatriated Spanish priests who died from Ebola, and is the first person to have caught the disease in Europe. Yesterday, Liberian national Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person to be diagnosed with Ebola in America, died of the disease in Dallas. The American government has now announced plans to start taking the temperatures of travellers arriving from West Africa in five US airports in response to the epidemic. More than 3,400 people have been killed by the outbreak in Africa.
It takes a special kind of person to dedicate their life to hospice care. Cora Sue Crounse, soon retiring from Montgomery County Community Hospice as a registered nurse case manager after 19 years of service, has had the tough but rewarding, she says task of tending to the terminally ill. And she has gained a reputation for her professional demeanor along the way. The 62 year old Tribes Hill resident has not taken her job for granted with each assigned patient Crounse has learned valuable life lessons and applied this knowledge to her career. With 19 years of service behind her, Crounse said she will miss her team of co workers who have made the job worthwhile. Her co workers will miss her, too. On Wednesday the group hosted a retirement party at their town of Amsterdam office and praised Crounse for her years of dedication. "One of the things I shared today was, Cora Sue, during major changes here, maintained her focus," chaplain Charles "Chuck" Hesselink said. "She was able to express herself in a way that you knew her interest was not her personal advancement what she did was for the patients." "I am sad to see her go," bereavement counselor Amy Weinar said. "I am happy for her, but sad for us. We are losing a tremendous nurse." Crounse is saying good bye to a career she is passionate about so she can move closer to her 92 year old father who lives in Florida. She and her former husband are moving down south next week to a house just six miles from the ocean. Even with the promise of beach weather ahead, Crounse said she plans to continue hospice work while in Florida. Her motto is "Once a nurse, always a nurse." And this, perhaps, will be reflected in the months ahead as she helps her brother in law, who is in need of hospice care, and her father, who is slowly aging. Although hard to leave her career, the Tribes Hill resident is walking away with countless memories and more wisdom as she starts a new chapter in her life. "It has been challenging. No two days are ever the same," Crounse said Wednesday, before her retirement party. "I learn something new every day on this job, whether it be from a family, a co worker, or a patient." Montgomery County's Community Hospice aids both young and old patients who have six months or fewer to live. And, it is Crounse's belief that no patient, or family member, should go without personal care during their final days with one another. As a registered nurse case manager, it was Crounse's job to visit patients once a week to ensure their symptoms, such as physical pain or respiratory issues, were properly managed to communicate with doctors when a problem arose and to recommend equipment for in home use. "Over the years it has been pretty amazing," she said. "There is so much you can do to provide the care in the homes, so people can stay there so they don't have to go to a nursing home or hospital." Crounse has worked in nursing since she graduating from Ellis Hospital School of Nursing in 1976. Even after high school, she worked as an aid at a nursing home in Guilderland and fell in love with the health care field. Though, what really inspired her to work in hospice was a close friend and co worker who was diagnosed with breast cancer at age 32. At the time, Crounse said she was not aware of hospice and watched her friend, Debbie, struggle to take care of herself and the people she loved. Crounse said she and other co workers would visit every day, bring the family a home cooked meal, and take the children to the park. One evening, Crounse said she invited those children for a sleep over so Debbie and her husband could celebrate a wedding anniversary. A few years later, while describing her friend's situation in an interview, a medical director told Crounse she acted as a hospice nurse without even knowing. She got the job as an on call nurse at a hospice facility in Poughkeepsie, Dutchess County, and later transferred to the former Capital District Hospice in Schenectady. She started working full time for Community Hospice in 1995, and has not left since. "Over the years, I thought of Debbie so many times," Crounse said. "That has been an inspiration to me to not let so many families struggle as they did." In 2002, Crounse learned one of her most valuable lessons when her mother was in hospice for nine days in Schenectady. Crounse said she and her sister would take turns taking care of mom, when the nurse was not around. One day, she said, the nurse phoned her right before she was about to jump in the shower. Crounse said she asked the nurse if she could wait an extra half hour before coming over and the nurse replied "absolutely," without hesitation. She said from that point on, she was more understanding when her patients or their families would ask for some extra time to themselves. "It made such an impression on me," she said. "It made me mindful, they have a whole life going on in the house, it is well beyond the visit."
Spanish health authorities said on Wednesday that another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola had tested negative for the disease. The man, a Spaniard who had traveled from Nigeria, was one of several people hospitalized after authorities confirmed on Monday that a Spanish nurse had caught the disease in Madrid. A second nurse was also cleared of Ebola. A third nursing assistant was hospitalised late on Tuesday for monitoring, a source at La Paz hospital said bringing the number of people examined in hospital for Ebola to five, two of whom tested negative. The first case of Ebola being contracted outside of West Africa was reported in Spain, and the World Health Organization expects more cases in Europe. Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, the first European infected by a strain of Ebola that has spread in West Africa died in a Madrid hospital in August after contracting the disease while working for a nonprofit in Liberia. In Dallas meanwhile, the Ebola patient fighting for his life in hospital was on a ventilator and a kidney dialysis machine to help stabilize his health, the hospital said Tuesday. Liberian national Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person diagnosed with the deadly virus on U.S. soil, has also been given the experimental medication brincidofovir. A hospital in Nebraska said it is using the same drug to treat an American journalist who was airlifted from Liberia and arrived Monday. Authorities in the United States and the public are on alert following Duncan's diagnosis more than a week ago, which raised concerns that the worst epidemic of Ebola on record could spread from three hardest hit impoverished countries Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. Duncan, who arrived in Texas in late September on a commercial flight from Liberia, has been in critical condition since Saturday.
It seems to me the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention are being less than forthright about the dangers of the Ebola virus. They are saying you can only contact the virus after contact with a victim's bodily fluids (blood, vomit, urine, feces, sweat) and it is not an airborne threat. Excuse me, but don't wet sneezes, coughs and saliva contain "bodily fluids?" The CDC is trying to prevent national panic but the virus hasn't been controlled in Western Africa and is beginning to pop up in the U.S. I think the CDC should call an emergency symposium and bring in infectious disease doctors from all major U.S. hospitals. The U.S. government should ban all commercial flights from African countries where the virus is spreading. Health care workers and supplies could be flown back and forth by private (government) planes. Also, are any other non third world countries sending health care workers to help with this crisis?
First, I saw Joan Walsh mentioning this exclusive Rand Paul interview over at Breitbart in which Paul charges the Obama administration with downplaying the threat of Ebola and says he fears a "worldwide pandemic." "If it's so hard to transmit why are doctors getting it with masks, gloves, boots and hats the whole works?" Paul asked. "Could we have a worldwide pandemic? The Spanish flu in 1918 killed 21 million people, the plague in the 14th century killed 25 million people I'm not saying that's going to happen, I don't know what's going to happen. But I think we should have travel restrictions at this point in time coming from Africa," Paul added. It is notable that the flu is an airborne contagion and Ebola is not. But Paul's not the only one hinting about this. Various right wing pundits have also raised the question of whether epidemiologists really know what airborne means. In fact, Paul's status as at least Ebola Truther curious, if not necessarily full blown Ebola Truther, seems tied to a series of articles and interviews raising doubts on this point. Fox News host Greg Jarrett on Friday published a column attacking the 'canard' that Ebola is not an airborne contagion. Which brings up another canard upon which the White House relies transmission. We are assured that Ebola is spread by direct contact with blood, mucus, saliva and other bodily fluids from an infected person. As if that'ssupposed to make us feel safer. We're told it cannot be transmitted through the air. Seriously? Think about that. Let's say an infected passenger gets past screening and begins coughing, which is the body's natural mechanism to evacuate the lungs. Any scientist will tell you that when someone coughs, microscopic droplets of saliva are projected from the mouth and into the air a distance of 7 to 12 feet. It is often invisible to the naked eye, but it can be inhaled by others and enter their respiratory tract or otherwise be ingested. It can also land on surfaces. This is how the influenza virus is often transmitted and spreads. Why not the Ebola virus? So how does Ron Paul come into this? And where does all this stuff about Ebola being an airborne disease come from? Well, admittedly the path is circuitous. But here goes. Over the weekend, as I was surveying emerging voices in the Ebola Truth Movement, I saw repeated references to statement released on Friday by the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons which casts doubt on claims that Ebola is not an airborne disease. Indeed, the statement from AAPS chief Jane Orient, MD seemed very similar to Jarrett's argument. The AAPS statement sounded different from everything I've seen from actual doctors and epidemiologists as opposed to pundits and scared people on Twitter. So I looked them up. And it turns out the AAPS is a conspiracy theory group founded in 1943 "to fight socialized medicine and to fight the government takeover of medicine." They've been around ever since opposing Social Security, Medicare and various other government programs. And they cropped up again as a player in the Tea Party infused opposition to Obamacare in 2009 10. But they were on to Obama much earlier. Like in 2008 when they suggested that President Obama was not simply a gifted orator but actually "deliberately using the techniques of neurolinguistic programming (NLP), a covert form of hypnosis developed by Milton Erickson, M.D.?" The group's journal has also claimed that humans have not contributed to climate change, that HIV does not cause AIDS, that abortion causes breast cancer, that undocumented immigrants are flooding the US with leprosy and various other claims that are either discredited within the actual medical community, based on conspiracy theories or simply insane. Some of the group's greatest hits are assembled here on their Wikipedia page. After reading up on the AAPS I decided my newfound mortal fear of Ebola as an airborne disease was likely not warranted and that the group was made up of far right cranks and conspiracy theorists. But guess who's a member? Ron Paul. And not just Ron Paul, GOP Rep. Paul Broun is too. So is Dr. David McKalip, the anti Obama activist who got in trouble back in 2009 for circulating the image of President Obama dressed as a witch doctor in a loin cloth and a tribal nose ornament. Yes, Rand Paul is also a member of the AAPS! In fact, the year before running for senate at their annual conference. "I use a lot of AAPS literature when I talk," he told the group in his speech. (Remember, Ran Paul elected to found his own ophthalmology board to certify him rather than seek certification from the group that certifies all the country's real eye doctors.) So Rand Paul, Ron Paul Greg Jarrett, Jane Orient. Is the AAPS the source of right leaning Ebola Truth Movement or only the part about it being an airborne disease?
Lately, the Benghazi hysteria that has dominated so much of Fox News' coverage since 2012 has given way to Ebola hysteria. But the channel's personalities have done their best to fuse the two stories. Offering her "take" on Monday, Fox host Gretchen Carlson rattled off all the reasons why Americans should question the federal government's response to the Ebola outbreak, ultimately meandering her way to the deadly attack on the U.S. consulate in Libya. With the government's recent track record not being so hot, well, we learned we couldn't trust the IRS after the targeting of conservative groups, the Secret Service after an armed man made his way into the white house, the VA after reports men and women who served this country died waiting to get health care. We couldn't trust the promise that Obamacare that we could keep our doctors that we wanted. And do we trust that we know all the answers yet about Benghazi? What more and more people seem to be asking about Ebola now isn't that they are necessarily scared about actually getting the disease, but that they're scared the government agencies responsible with helping us if we do get sick might not be up to the task. So if Ebola becomes a bigger issue, the question still remains will we be safe? Carlson is just the latest conservative to invoke Benghazi in a discussion of Ebola, with former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee making a nearly identical point over the weekend. Reality TV star Donald Trump did the same during his weekly appearance on Fox earlier in the day.
Oct. 6, 2014 Amid continued confusion over how Ebola spreads, the World Health Organization issued new guidance on Monday aimed at public education. First, the agency says, the virus is not airborne. Catching it through the air would depend on getting an infectious dose of the virus from a suspended cloud of tiny particles. That's how diseases like the flu and measles are spread. Those viruses become airborne because specific cells that line the lungs and nose release a fine spray of viral particles into the air, says Elke Muhlberger, PhD. She's a microbiologist at the Boston University School of Medicine who specializes in the study of Ebola. People don't even need to have symptoms to spread those diseases, she says. Ebola, on the other hand, is contagious only when someone has symptoms. Scientists have been studying Ebola for decades, and they've never seen the disease passed through the air, according to the WHO. What's more, it's highly unlikely that the virus could change to become airborne. The only way Ebola gets into the air is in large droplets of vomit or saliva. These droplets are heavy and wouldn't be able to travel very far. In theory, people might be able to catch it if someone coughed or sneezed directly onto them, but people who get Ebola generally don't cough or sneeze. What's more, the WHO says it's not aware of any studies that have ever shown the virus spreading this way. Catching Ebola from someone else requires "close and direct" contact with infected body fluids, the WHO says. The most infectious body fluids are blood, stool, and vomit. The virus has also been found in breast milk and urine and in semen for up to 70 days, though those fluids are considered to be less infectious. Finally, the WHO says saliva and tears may also carry some risk, but it says more research is needed. In studies of saliva, the virus was only found in people who were in advanced stages of the disease. The live Ebola virus has never been found in sweat, the WHO says. The CDC says that in a single study, done under ideal conditions, the virus has been found to remain active on solid surfaces for up to 6 days. In theory, then, a person might be able to touch a contaminated surface, rub their nose or eyes, and become infected. But the WHO believes the risk of getting the disease this way is probably low. You can cut that risk even further by properly cleaning and disinfecting surfaces.
Ebola is no longer a disease that only Dustin Hoffman is paranoid about. People around the world are worried that we might have a pandemic on our hands that modern medical technology may not be able to stop. Yet, researchers around the world aren't sitting on their hands waiting to be consumed by the disease and the fear it engenders. One major part in being able to control the spread of Ebola is early identification of infected patients. Currently, time consuming and expensive fluorescent label based techniques are used to spot the Ebola virus in blood samples, often allowing the disease to spread faster than it can be tracked down. Scientists at Boston University have been developing a new photonic device that doesn't require labeling of samples and may provide quick and accurate diagnosis of Ebola anywhere it is taken. The device has already been shown to be able to spot individual H1N1 virus particles, but now the researchers have shown that it can identify multiple viruses at the same time, including viruses that were genetically modified to resemble Ebola and Marburg. Previous techniques generally required a few hours of preparation and processing before results were provided, but the new device demands very little prep and spits out results within about one hour. The device is a so called "single particle interferometric reflectance imaging sensor (SP IRIS)" that shines multi colored light onto a surface coated with anti bodies that attract specific viruses. The reflection of this light is affected by viruses that are stuck to the coated surface, and the size and type of the virus particle defines how that light appears to a light sensor. From the study abstract in ACS Nano We demonstrate identification of virus particles in complex samples for replication competent wild type vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), defective VSV, and Ebola and Marburg pseudotyped VSV with high sensitivity and specificity. Size discrimination of the imaged nanoparticles (virions) allows differentiation between modified viruses having different genome lengths and facilitates a reduction in the counting of nonspecifically bound particles to achieve a limit of detection (LOD) of 5 103 pfu mL for the Ebola and Marburg VSV pseudotypes. We demonstrate the simultaneous detection of multiple viruses in a single sample (composed of serum or whole blood) for screening applications and uncompromised detection capabilities in samples contaminated with high levels of bacteria. By employing affinity based capture, size discrimination, and a "digital" detection scheme to count single virus particles, we show that a robust and sensitive virus nanoparticle sensing assay can be established for targets in complex samples. The nanoparticle microscopy system is termed the Single Particle Interferometric Reflectance Imaging Sensor (SP IRIS) and is capable of high throughput and rapid sizing of large numbers of biological nanoparticles on an antibody microarray for research and diagnostic applications.
CBS News When the Ebola outbreak in West Africa rose to the levels of a full fledged epidemic, it didn't take long for some U.S. politicians to begin publicly hypothesizing about shocking ways the virus could spread here. One theory suggests that perhaps Ebola would be an attractive biological weapon for terror groups seeking to attack the United States. Others attempted to connect the virus to another perceived security threat that illegal U.S Mexico border crossers could be carrying the disease. In July, Rep. Phil Gingrey, R Georgia, wrote a letter to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Tom Frieden saying that, "reports of illegal migrants carrying deadly diseases such as swine flu, dengue fever, Ebola virus, and tuberculosis are particularly concerning." Rep. Randy Weber, R Texas, told Breitbart News, "There is no telling what might eventually make its way into the heartland." Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich reportedly told a group of Republican lawmakers that porous borders left Americans susceptible to immigrants carrying the virus.However, in rebutting that theory, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Director Anthony Fauci said on "Fox News Sunday" that the possibility of immigrants coming across the border with the disease is "hypothetical" and "very far fetched." Lawrence Gostin, the director of the O'Neill Institute for National and Global Health Law at Georgetown University pointed out to CBS News that there has never been an outbreak of Ebola in Latin America, only in Africa. And Carl Meacham, the director of the Americas program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies noted that the largest West African communities in Latin America that might see visitors from West Africa, where the outbreak is happening, are in Brazil and parts of the Caribbean not countries that make up the highest levels of illegal immigration, like El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Mexico. Still, Meacham said it's impossible to say the chances are "nil" that a terror group would try to exploit the pathways used by illegal immigrants to come to the U.S.Which leads to the possibility, floated by "Fox News Sunday" host Chris Wallace, that terrorists could dispatch an Ebola victim to the southern border as a human biological terror weapon. "If I were a bioterrorist, that would not be my choice," said Fauci in response. "It would be inefficient. Nature does it much worse than a bioterrorist." Meacham added, "The issues that have to do with coming into the United States through the channels that folks come in for work illegally are there, but it's much less likely, I would say, that folks would try to do this with Ebola if they can already come in by air directly to metropolitan areas.". Experts back that up not only does an Ebola outbreak among immigrants seem like a low probability right now, but the virus would also be incredibly difficult to use as a weapon against Americans. "Ebola would be a very poor biological weapon," said Gostin. The number one reason, he said, is that it's not aerosolized, or spread by air."Unless it could be somehow genetically altered so that you could make it into an aerosol that was airborne, which would be unlikely at this stage, it would be a very poor biological weapon," he said, given that Ebola victims are "not infectious until they're very sick, and ... when they're very sick they're likely to die." A sick person "couldn't possibly make that journey" across the U.S. Mexico border, Gostin said. Carl Schultz, a professor of emergency medicine at University of California, Irvine, with emphasis on disaster medicine and terrorism, said smallpox is a far better example of a virus that could be used as a weapon in either human or bomb form. But, Schultz told CBS News, it's still not that easy."While in theory it looks like biological weapons would be great... it's lot harder to implement than you would think," he said. Samples of the smallpox virus are kept by the U.S. and Russian governments, and trying to concoct the virus in a lab would raise red flags. "Every time you try to do something like that set up a lab, purchase equipment you leave a paper trail," Schultz said. It would also be incredibly technically difficult to genetically alter Ebola to spread through the air."I'm not sure any scientists could do it but I think it would be well beyond the capabilities of any terrorists at the moment," Gostin said. Meanwhile, some, including Sen. Rand Paul, R Kentucky, have raised the possibility that Ebola might be more easily transmissible than is believed. "I don't think that there's data to tell us that that's a correct statement, with all due respect," Fauci said on CBS' "Face the Nation." He elaborated on the topic on "Fox News Sunday" when confronted with a New York Times op ed from Michael Osterholm, the director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research at the University of Minnesota, who wrote that Ebola could mutate to become transmissible through air. "Certainly hypothetically, anything can happen. But if you look at the track record of viruses, viruses mutate and they change," Fauci said. "It is extremely rare if not unprecedented that a mutation will occur to completely make it transmitted by a way it never transmitted before. Is it theoretically possible? Yes. Is it likely? No."
The search for an Ebola vaccine began at a Purdue biology lab at least a dozen years ago. "If we're thinking about treatment, it might be best to focus on suppressing the inappropriate immune response," said researcher Dr. David Sanders. Doctors know the thing that kills Ebola victims is their immune system's spiraling out of control, even bleeding the body to get rid of the disease. At Purdue, they found combining Ebola with some other virus in a vaccine puts the brakes on the immune system's response. "Turns out part of our work is to show that there are certain parts that you should include in the vaccine and others that you should actually keep out of the vaccine," said Sanders. Vaccines are not ready yet, so Sanders says top priority is to control the disease spread. "The longer the epidemic goes on, the greater the likelihood that the virus could be transmitted by an airborne route," he said. Ebola does not spread in the air now, only by body fluids, so it's got to be contained before it can morph into an airborne disease he says. "I call it Ebola, the good the bad and the ugly," said Sanders. Good because it has characteristics that could one day help deliver helpful drugs to patients with lung problems. The researcher says people tend to worry about the newest disease on the scene, but it's the older ones that have been with us so long that we can't ignore. "Influenza is clearly a much more important risk for the American population as a whole than Ebola," he said.
Scientists have reached a surprising level of consensus on the appropriate response to the West African Ebola epidemic, despite the appearance of bitter disputes and wild pendulum swings in the media. In August, CBS CBS Atlanta and the Associated Press reported that the epidemic was "Spinning out of Control", Slate said it was "Spiraling Out of Control," at the same time Bloomberg Bloomberg News listed "Five Threats More Terrifying than Ebola Entering the U.S.", including the threat of a giant electromagnetic pulse. The perception of discord among experts worsened after epidemiologist Michael Osterholm of the University of Minnesota wrote an opinion piece for the September 11 New York Times noting that the Ebola virus is evolving and that there's a remote but real possibility it would acquire a more efficient way to spread among humans even an airborne route. Quickly Time and Scientific American responded with stories quoting other scientists saying this would not happen. Those counterarguments were echoed in the Washington Post and other media outlets. And yet, scientists are more or less in agreement that there are big unknowns and that the West African outbreak calls for serious and swift action. Getting the straight story is of enormous importance now that a man from Liberia came down with Ebola symptoms in Texas and health officials are tracking down dozens of people who may have had contact with him while he was potentially contagous. Despite the backlash that followed Osterholm's New York Times opinion piece, other scientists agree with his key points, which were that the world should devote resources to containing the epidemic in West Africa, that there's a lot of uncertainty about the future, and that the uncertainty gives us more incentive to act. "...we are in totally uncharted waters and...mother nature is the only force in charge of the crisis at this time." Steven Morse, an epidemiologist at Columbia University, said all the furor over Osterholm's speculation on airborne spread has overshadowed a more important and serious point in his editorial The virus is evolving, it will evolve faster as the number of cases mushrooms, and it may acquire mechanisms to spread more easily than it does at the present time. Still, the Times piece contained a few statements that other scientists called out as misleading, including the notion that should Ebola become airborne, "Infections could spread quickly to every part of the globe, as the H1N1 influenza virus did in 2009." Maybe, but probably not, say some critics. The editorial started out on the wrong track by using the headline, "What we're Afraid to Say about Ebola." That suggests a level of collusion and secrecy among scientists for which he offers no evidence in the piece. The piece that followed in Scientific American, too, suffers from a bad headline True or False, Ebola Will Go Airborne. That's like saying True or False, there will be a major earthquake in Los Angles next Wednesday. It's not only nonsensical, but encourages a fallacious black or white thinking about an issue of probabilities and risks. (Note to Scientific American editors A Google Google search yields the following "The Ebola Virus Will Go Airborne Scientific American." The truncated headline gives a message that undermines the point of the story.) The story's author explains in some technical detail why it's next to impossible for the virus to get into cells in the airway, quoting Vanderbilt University infectious disease expert William Schaffner, who said the virus isn't equipped to attach to receptors in the cells that line our airways. But Dr. Schaffner does not do research in this area. Biologist David Sanders at Purdue University does. In fact, Sanders conducts experiments with modified Ebola viruses and tissue cultures and he said he has seen direct evidence that Ebola does have the capacity to attach to receptors in the so called epithelial cells in human lungs. "Saying that Ebola can't get into the airway because it can't find the receptors is patently wrong," he said. "We know Ebola has the correct interactions with the receptors so the sort of argument they are making is fallacious." Sanders explained that the cells lining our lungs, called epithelial cells, are separated from one another by two membranes the basolateral membrane, which interfaces with the bloodstream, and the apical membrane, which interfaces with the outside environment. HIV moves out through the basolateral membrane, while influenza moves in and out through the apical membrane. That means HIV is extremely unlikely to become airborne because it can't move through the appropriate membrane. Sanders puts the risk at essentially zero. Not so for Ebola, since his experiments show it can get through the apical membrane. That doesn't mean it's likely to evolve the capacity to become airborne, he said, but the possibility is not vanishingly small as it is for HIV. How unlikely? Not enough is known to put a number on it. But even if the virus did become airborne, it might not spread rapidly that way, he said. The ability to do that depends on many factors, including how long it can survive on surfaces, viral concentrations in epithelial cells, and other unknown factors. In some cases, such as anthrax, the symptoms and severity of the disease differs depending on whether it's inhaled or acquired through a cut in the skin. Vanderbilt's Schaffner, who was quoted in Scientific American, said he was not familiar with Sanders' papers, and that the nitty gritty of viruses interacting with cell membranes was not his specialty. The other expert in the story, Thomas Geisbert of the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galviston, was quoted saying something that echoed Sanders "I don't think we have the information at this time to know what the real risk is, but it is probably not zero." Despite any perceived disagreement, many experts seem to have found consensus on the main point appropriating resources now could avert a much worse situation in the future due to the exponential spread of the disease and its undisputed capacity for evolution in directions that can't be forecast. The main difference seems to be over the reasons behind the call for action. There's the obvious one people are dying in West Africa. Should the remote possibility of a wider spread be included too? This is a minor point of disagreement. Dr. Osterholm, in his Times editorial, backs the sentiment of Penn's Harvey Rubin in calling for an international organization devoted to responding to infectious disease outbreaks. He suggests a more concrete role for the United Nations a course of action that hardly smells of panic. Morse, the epidemiologist from Columbia University, put it in more concrete terms. Though he admits he's delving into politics, he sees the situation as serious enough to warrant sending U.S. troops into the heart of the outbreak to help. There's a lot the military can do, he said, including getting hospitals enough potable water. And yet, as deployments go, fighting Ebola is relatively safe, he said. The military has the equipment for facing biological and chemical threats, he said, and so they can do a lot of good with relatively little risk of getting killed. Scientists should be open about risk and uncertainty. They won't incite hysteria as long as they are clear about separating fact from hypothesis from speculation. And they need to provide enough context and interpretation to avoid being misconstrued as either too alarmist or too complacent. Neither extreme will serve the world well.
WHO Ebola situation assessment What we know about transmission of the Ebola virus among humans GENEVA, Switzerland, October 6, 2014 African Press Organization (APO) Ebola situation assessment 6 October 2014 The Ebola virus is transmitted among humans through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, faeces and vomit. The Ebola virus has also been detected in breast milk, urine and semen. In a convalescent male, the virus can persist in semen for at least 70 days one study suggests persistence for more than 90 days. Saliva and tears may also carry some risk. However, the studies implicating these additional bodily fluids were extremely limited in sample size and the science is inconclusive. In studies of saliva, the virus was found most frequently in patients at a severe stage of illness. The whole live virus has never been isolated from sweat. The Ebola virus can also be transmitted indirectly, by contact with previously contaminated surfaces and objects. The risk of transmission from these surfaces is low and can be reduced even further by appropriate cleaning and disinfection procedures. Ebola virus disease is not an airborne infection. Airborne spread among humans implies inhalation of an infectious dose of virus from a suspended cloud of small dried droplets. This mode of transmission has not been observed during extensive studies of the Ebola virus over several decades. Common sense and observation tell us that spread of the virus via coughing or sneezing is rare, if it happens at all. Epidemiological data emerging from the outbreak are not consistent with the pattern of spread seen with airborne viruses, like those that cause measles and chickenpox, or the airborne bacterium that causes tuberculosis. Theoretically, wet and bigger droplets from a heavily infected individual, who has respiratory symptoms caused by other conditions or who vomits violently, could transmit the virus over a short distance to another nearby person. This could happen when virus laden heavy droplets are directly propelled, by coughing or sneezing (which does not mean airborne transmission) onto the mucus membranes or skin with cuts or abrasions of another person. WHO is not aware of any studies that actually document this mode of transmission. On the contrary, good quality studies from previous Ebola outbreaks show that all cases were infected by direct close contact with symptomatic patients. Moreover, scientists are unaware of any virus that has dramatically changed its mode of transmission. For example, the H5N1 avian influenza virus, which has caused sporadic human cases since 1997, is now endemic in chickens and ducks in large parts of Asia. That virus has probably circulated through many billions of birds for at least two decades. Its mode of transmission remains basically unchanged. Speculation that Ebola virus disease might mutate into a form that could easily spread among humans through the air is just that speculation, unsubstantiated by any evidence. This kind of speculation is unfounded but understandable as health officials race to catch up with this fast moving and rapidly evolving outbreak.
Q "How long does the virus survive outside of a host, and is there any difference in this time among the various types of bodily fluids and the type of surface?" Paula in Hyde Park A Scientists have looked at this issue and even though Ebola is a terrible infection to get, it's not that easy to get. Again, it's not airborne, so you're not going to get sick by breathing in the air after someone has coughed or sneezed around you. It requires significant contact with contaminated bodily fluids from someone who is already really, really sick. Ebola is a fragile virus, meaning that it doesn't tend to survive long outside of a host. It's vulnerable to heat, light, dryness, cleaning products and it's unlikely to last for longer than minutes on a doorknob or shopping cart handle or on the pole in a train or bus. Q "Granted conditions are more primitive in the African outbreak, but how big is the risk in this country to health care workers?" Jack in Lexington A The areas in West Africa which have been devastated by Ebola have real serious problems with sanitation, and protective gear hasn't always been available or adequate. Here in the U.S., we have clean hospitals, access to the best equipment, state of the art facilities. And as healthcare workers, we are used to looking out for all kinds of infectious diseases, even ones that are much more highly contagious than Ebola like influenza and tuberculosis. Q "My kids, 8 11, both have had wet coughs after a cold all week. Should we be concerned that it could turn into an enterovirus?" Jori A There are so many things that could be causing your kids' coughs. It certainly could be a typical case of enterovirus D68, with runny nose and cough, but it could be another cold virus circulating this time of year. And then some kids are suffering from ragweed allergies right now. If your children are otherwise well no breathing problems, staying hydrated, chances are they are fine. Any change from that, take them in to see their doctor.
The Galveston National Laboratory based in Texas, the U.S., has finished pre clinical tests of an aerosol vaccine against the Ebola virus, project supervisor, University of Texas Professor Alexander Bukreyev said at a scientific conference near Novosibirsk. He said the U.S. authorities had assigned 1 million for the first stage of the vaccine's clinical tests his laboratory might carry out within a brief period of time. "The rules are loosened up a bit considering the circumstances, and we can make rapider progress. It is hard to tell, the tests may be over in six to twelve months," he said. Significant progress has been made in the development of the Ebola vaccine, mostly in the United States and Canada, and five or six experimental vaccines have been created, he said. "We have curative antibodies already and a fantastic breakthrough has been made in the past three years," the expert said. He said the vaccine created in his laboratory was based on a genetically modified para influenza virus with inbuilt Ebola virus envelope proteins. The Ebola virus envelope elicits an immune response of the organism but some other genes suppress it, he said. "The developed recombinant virus produces the Ebola virus envelope and an organism, the immune system of the animal or the person, produces antibodies to deal with the Ebola virus envelope which will eventually protect the organism from the Ebola virus itself," the expert continued. Bukreyev said the laboratory was trying to adjust the vaccine to all types of the Ebola virus. In his opinion, the Ebola virus does not have a pandemic potential and it does not undergo a genetic change as rapidly and forcefully as the hepatitis C virus or some others. "Each outbreak has little differences but these are not drastically different viruses," he said. The Ebola virus has claimed over 3,000 lives in a number of West African countries, primarily Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea.
Bacteria, viruses, and diseases are a part of life. As global warming marches on, expect the return of viruses which have not been seen for decades. Expect also the mutation and evolution of hybrid viruses. Chikungunya and Ebola have not been commissioned by God or Satan. Neither are the diseases a consequence of moral failure or political negligence. Like other natural phenomena such as earthquakes, hurricanes, and volcanoes, the created order is dynamic, and life is what it is because of the multiplicity of forces at work. Some of these factors lead to death, especially where effective responses have not been engaged. It is ever so misleading, and even embarrassing, to hear representatives of the church and other religious groups declaring that a virus is the voice of God! Since we have all been recipients of a brain, we ought to use it more. If the Bible were a substitute for the brain, numerous transplants would have been done before. Whether people are of religious faith or otherwise, we may indeed use the current concerns regarding chik V and Ebola catalysts for some life enriching experiences and lessons. Jamaica can ill afford the luxury of political mileage at the expense of working together. Why should anyone die after seeking medical care and waiting almost 24 hours in a medical facility? We have good cause at hand for thousands of Jamaicans to march for literally clearing the environment of mosquito breeding sites. Imagine communities, led by the churches in them, marching out to do a massive clean up of anything that would encourage the breeding of mosquitoes. We have good cause at hand for community partnering to transcend the barriers of political colours and religious bigotry. Imagine communities in which it does not matter what your religious affiliation is and people become more focused on the well being of everyone. We have good cause at hand to be reminded that Ebola does not care whether or not you keep Sabbath. Ebola does not care whether or not you are the only one with the 'truth'. Ebola is most certainly not interested in your ability to speak or not speak in unknown tongues. Like any other disease affecting primates and humans, Ebola's only interest is people! What a powerful opportunity we have at our disposal. Will we use it?
The outbreak of the Ebola virus in West Africa has caused concern in the U.S that it could become widespread, but a Sellersville Doctor says it need to be put in perspective. Dr. Todd Aldefer is a cardiologist and frequent guest on WNPV Radio. "Ebola is dangerous, but this is a third world country virus. In many places where it has broken out, they don't have the medical resources to cope with it. Many of the people who have come down with it entered who this country and brought it with them. They are being quarantined and treated. What people in the U.S should be concerned about in influenza, which is far more pervasive in this country and takes the lives of elderly, the very young every, and people with medical conditions every year." Aldefer was a guest on the Am Edition Tuesday Morning.
UC Santa Cruz Genomics Institute releases bioinformatic tool to assist vaccine efforts The UC Santa Cruz Ebola Genome Portal contains links to the newly created Ebola browser and to scientific literature on the deadly virus. The UC Santa Cruz Genomics Institute late Tuesday (September 30) released a new Ebola genome browser to assist global efforts to develop a vaccine and antiserum to help stop the spread of the Ebola virus. The team led by University of California, Santa Cruz researcher Jim Kent worked around the clock for the past week, communicating with international partners to gather and present the most current data. The Ebola virus browser aligns five strains of Ebola with two strains of the related Marburg virus. Within these strains, Kent and other members of the UC Santa Cruz Genome Browser team have aligned 148 individual viral genomes, including 102 from the current West Africa outbreak. UC Santa Cruz has established the UCSC Ebola Genome Portal, with links to the new Ebola genome browser as well as links to all the relevant scientific literature on the virus. "Ebola has been one of my biggest fears ever since I learned about it in my first microbiology class in 1997," said Kent, who 14 years ago created the first working draft of the human genome. "We need a heroic worldwide effort to contain Ebola. Making an informatics resource like the genome browser for Ebola researchers is the least we could do." Scientists around the world can access the open source browser to compare genetic changes in the virus genome and areas where it remains the same. The browser allows scientists and researchers from drug companies, other universities, and governments to study the virus and its genomic changes as they seek a solution to halt the epidemic. The release of the new Ebola genome browser comes as the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Tuesday confirmed the first case of Ebola in the United States. The Ebola browser was started shortly after a phone conversation between Kent and his sister, an epidemiologist at the CDC, who spoke of how she and her staff were consumed with Ebola research in the face of the escalating crisis. UC Santa Cruz Professor Phil Berman, an HIV specialist, had also asked Kent for help with his efforts in developing a vaccine for Ebola. Kent asked his supervisor, UC Santa Cruz bioinformatics researcher David Haussler, if he could divert his team to Ebola work. Haussler replied with an enthusiastic affirmative, and they pulled together a team of UC Santa Cruz bioinformatics scientists that, within a week, was able to create a fully functional Ebola genome browser. "The incredible speed with which this group was able to assemble all the genetic information about Ebola and make it available to the world shows what a great team Jim Kent has assembled," Haussler said. In June 2000, Kent and Haussler released the first working draft of the human genome sequence on the web. Two months later, Kent developed the UCSC Genome Browser, which has become an essential resource to biomedical science. In a similar marshaling of forces in the face of a worldwide threat 11 years ago, UC Santa Cruz researchers created a SARS virus browser.
Sex could keep the Ebola epidemic alive even after the World Health Organization (WHO) declares an area free of the disease, one of the discoverers of the deadly virus said on Tuesday. The WHO is hoping to announce later this week that Nigeria and Senegal are free of Ebola after 42 days with no infections the standard period for declaring an outbreak over, twice the maximum 21 day incubation period of the virus. However, it appears the disease can last much longer in semen. "In a convalescent male, the virus can persist in semen for at least 70 days one study suggests persistence for more than 90 days," the WHO said in an information note on Monday. "Certainly, the advice has to be for survivors to use a condom, to not have unprotected sex, for 90 days," said Peter Piot, a professor at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and a discoverer of Ebola in 1976. "If we would apply the rule for double the time, that would be 180 days six months. I think it (90 days) is probably a compromise, for practicality," he told a news conference in Geneva. Ebola spreads via bodily fluids such as blood and saliva, but it has also been detected in breast milk and urine, as well as semen, the WHO says. The whole live virus has never been isolated from sweat, however. More than 3,400 people are already known to have died in the world's worst Ebola outbreak on record, the vast majority of them in three West African countries Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
CAMDEN In the fight against infectious diseases, researchers often look for new methods to improve treatments and find cures. Computational biology is one field that is playing an increasingly significant role in that fight. "There is a constant quest to find new therapeutics or improve on existing ones and computational analysis is becoming more important to achieve that," says Desmond Lun, an associate professor and chair of the Department of Computer Science at Rutgers University Camden. Lun is an active participant in Rutgers Camden's Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, which combines traditional biomedical research with analytic methods employed by mathematicians and computer scientists to understand how biological systems work. There are a number of different approaches computational biologists take when studying infectious diseases, Lun says, and a primary approach is studying genome sequences of organisms and using them to understand the evolution of a disease and what makes different people more or less susceptible to a disease. "Viruses have a pathway by which they enter the host and that pathway begins with them somehow attaching to a cell. There are genetic variations in the initial contact mechanism," Lun explains. "Computational biologists use computers to develop models of an organism in order to understand what interventions can be used to disrupt that contact." The recent Ebola virus outbreak in West Africa which has claimed more than 1,200 lives, according to the World Health Organization and the treatment of some patients with an experimental drug, is raising questions about potential vaccinations. It's possible that computational science could play a role in the evolution of those treatments. "What makes Ebola unique among the things that computational biologists tend to study is that it is a virus, and as such has a very small number of proteins. Therefore, a large part of understanding viral diseases involves understanding how they interact with human hosts," Lun says. One of Lun's own research projects has focused on the development of new methods to fight the bacterium that causes tuberculosis, which usually attack the lungs, but also can attack other parts of the body such as the kidneys, spine, and brain. The Rutgers Camden professor uses computational analysis to try to find how to disrupt the organism's metabolism, therefore slowing its growth. "We still use many of the same drugs that we were using decades ago to fight tuberculosis," Lun says. "We know that there is a steady increase in antibiotic resistance, so we are constantly trying to develop new ones. It gets harder and harder to do so and we have to continue to develop new methods to interrupt the way the bacterium survives and replicates in its host." Lun, a Philadelphia resident, earned bachelor's degrees in mathematics and computer engineering from the University of Melbourne in Australia. He received his master's in electrical engineering and doctorate in computer science from MIT.
Now that Ebola is here, it has captured the attention it arguably deserved from us long ago. The latest news is that the patient first diagnosed in the U.S. is in critical condition, and receiving experimental therapy. Lapses in our public health system have been acknowledged, and a scramble to contain the damage, and prevent spread, are playing out as we look on, and worry. That worry is home to both greater and lesser concerns. The lesser concerns are the more plausible. The patient in Dallas might have transmitted the disease. Others like him might find their way here. Our experimental therapies may fail. The greater concern, rather less plausible, is that the Ebola virus could go airborne. What's fascinating about this grim scenario is that those who know science best fear it least. As best I can tell, browsing cyberspace, this fear is most acute among those least schooled in microbiology. Whether or not that association is meaningful, the worry is obviously widespread. A Google search of "Ebola going airborne" retrieves more than 12 million results. I will leave the prophecies of doom to others, and focus instead on something we can actually control our relationship with science. What would it mean if Ebola did go airborne, other than potential catastrophe? It would mean we were watching evolution by natural selection play out in real time. Given the popularity of refuting evolution and natural selection in our culture, an overlap between this position and fear of Ebola going airborne is a fait accompli. In other words, we have people refuting natural selection and worrying about its consequences at the same time. I imagine some may think that Ebola going airborne is only a trivial example of natural selection, because Ebola is "only" a virus. Perhaps the thinking prevails that this could happen to a microbe, but never to us. This, of course, is nonsense. It is an established fact of biology that there is more genetic variation among microbes, notably bacteria, than among all the rest of the living Kingdoms combined. Penguins are genetically more like pine trees than some bacteria are like some others. Viruses are genetically simpler, but also represent more profound biological variation than we animals do. So converting a virus that cannot "fly" as a means of transmission into one that can is, in fact, a profound alteration in biology. The organism involved is tiny, but not biologically trivial. To illustrate the magnitude of the transformation, imagine a "mutation" that enabled humans to fly. If some of us suddenly sprouted fully formed, fully functional wings it would certainly imply intelligent design. It won't happen for many reasons, of course, but my point is the process that would enable Ebola to go airborne is the same process. The biological requirements for airborne transmission are as apparently design laden as those wings, albeit too tiny for us to see. We don't seem to require intelligent engineering to account for it in Ebola's case just the forces of survival. What's good for the goose, however, is good for the gander. The example proves the general principle. Natural selection is enough to produce profound, and seemingly designed, biological change. It isn't just real it's happening before our eyes. I note, in passing, that the acknowledgement of natural selection as an established force of nature does not obligate any particular religious view. Who among us presumes to know the exact methods used by an entity so far above our pay grade? Scripture is silent on the details of methodology. With or without any particular deity setting it in motion, evolution by natural selection is an established force shaping not only our history, but our current events. Why bother to care? Because dismissal and denigration of science conspire against us all. By denying the science substantiating both climate change and our role in it, even while propagating it using technology derived from the same scientific method, we allow it to progress to the point of calamity. By ignoring the implications of an evolved, biological balance, we dismiss the relevance of Ebola in other species until the inevitable jump to our own. We forestall public health advance routinely by favoring ideology over epidemiology. The likelihood of Ebola going airborne, let alone doing so while retaining its current virulence, is remote. But as millions seem to recognize, it is possible. The worry alone is an acknowledgment of the power of natural selection. That, in turn, invites a corresponding acknowledgement of the power of science. Imperfect though it may be, it is the best means we have to understand ourselves and the world. Forewarned is supposed to mean forearmed. If, however, we indulge routinely in misguided debate about the most reliable source of such warnings we disarm ourselves.
GENEVA (Reuters) Sex could keep the Ebola epidemic alive even after the World Health Organization (WHO) declares an area free of the disease, one of the discoverers of the deadly virus said on Tuesday. The WHO is hoping to announce later this week that Nigeria and Senegal are free of Ebola after 42 days with no infections the standard period for declaring an outbreak over, twice the maximum 21 day incubation period of the virus. However, it appears the disease can last much longer in semen. "In a convalescent male, the virus can persist in semen for at least 70 days one study suggests persistence for more than 90 days," the WHO said in an information note on Monday. "Certainly, the advice has to be for survivors to use a condom, to not have unprotected sex, for 90 days," said Peter Piot, a professor at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and a discoverer of Ebola in 1976. "If we would apply the rule for double the time, that would be 180 days six months. I think it (90 days) is probably a compromise, for practicality," he told a news conference in Geneva. Ebola spreads via bodily fluids such as blood and saliva, but it has also been detected in breast milk and urine, as well as semen, the WHO says. The whole live virus has never been isolated from sweat, however. More than 3,400 people are already known to have died in the world's worst Ebola outbreak on record, the vast majority of them in three West African countries Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. This story has not been edited by Firstpost staff and is generated by auto feed.
GENEVA Sex could keep the Ebola epidemic alive even after the World Health Organization (WHO) declares an area free of the disease, one of the discoverers of the deadly virus said on Tuesday. The WHO is hoping to announce later this week that Nigeria and Senegal are free of Ebola after 42 days with no infections the standard period for declaring an outbreak over, twice the maximum 21 day incubation period of the virus. However, it appears the disease can last much longer in semen. "In a convalescent male, the virus can persist in semen for at least 70 days one study suggests persistence for more than 90 days," the WHO said in an information note on Monday. "Certainly, the advice has to be for survivors to use a condom, to not have unprotected sex, for 90 days," said Peter Piot, a professor at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and a discoverer of Ebola in 1976. "If we would apply the rule for double the time, that would be 180 days six months. I think it (90 days) is probably a compromise, for practicality," he told a news conference in Geneva. Ebola spreads via bodily fluids such as blood and saliva, but it has also been detected in breast milk and urine, as well as semen, the WHO says. The whole live virus has never been isolated from sweat, however. More than 3,400 people are already known to have died in the world's worst Ebola outbreak on record, the vast majority of them in three West African countries Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Dr. Peter Piot was just 27, a budding virologist with a thirst for adventure, when he was dispatched to the heart of Africa to track down a terrifying virus that he had helped discover. It was 1976, and the virus had arrived at his laboratory in Antwerp, Belgium, in a blue plastic cooler holding two glass tubes of blood. They had been sent from Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of Congo) by a doctor caring for a Flemish nun who was dying of fever and loss of blood. One tube was intact. The other was broken its contents mingled with melted ice to form a red soup. A bloodstained note said the nun was among 200 people, including doctors and nurses, dying in an outbreak that had raged for three weeks in remote Yambuku, not far from the Ebola River. The prime suspect was yellow fever, a mosquito borne infection that Dr. Piot's laboratory at the Institute of Tropical Medicine was equipped to detect. But unknown to anyone then, the nun's blood harbored the virus that was soon to be named Ebola. In those days, microbiologists were cavalier about protection. As Dr. Piot and his colleagues emptied the thermos, they wore only thin latex gloves none of the high security masks and moonsuits that are now standard. They removed small amounts of blood from the intact tube to carry out routine tests for known microbes and special tests for yellow fever, along with hemorrhagic fever viruses like Lassa, Marburg and dengue. They also injected the nun's blood into cells grown in the laboratory and the brains of mice. The tests excluded all known infectious agents, but Dr. Piot assumed that whichever one had caused the nun's illness must have been destroyed during the airplane trip from Zaire. Still, he and his colleagues checked the mice each day. After a week, all the mice were dead, strongly hinting that the infectious agent had not been destroyed after all. An autopsy showed that the nun's liver had microscopic lesions that Dr. Piot's boss, Dr. Stefaan Pattyn, knew to occur in Lassa fever. But because Lassa had already been ruled out, Dr. Pattyn steered the research toward identifying a new one. At the time, only three laboratories outside the Soviet Union were equipped to handle deadly viruses safely Porton Down, near London Fort Detrick, a military base in Maryland and what is now known as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in Atlanta. The World Health Organization instructed the Belgians to immediately send the samples in tightly sealed containers to Porton Down, which, in turn, forwarded them to the C.D.C. because it was the world's reference laboratory for hemorrhagic viruses. The Antwerp scientists kept part of the material and looked at it through an electron microscope. It showed that the nun's virus was a new one wormlike, and huge as viruses go that resembled Marburg. C.D.C. scientists then confirmed the Antwerp team's discovery and named the virus Ebola. Dr. Piot's wife was three months pregnant with their first child. Yet scientific curiosity fueled his desire to go to Zaire to undertake the epidemiologic investigations to determine how this new virus spread. The Belgian government said it lacked funds for such travel until politics and scientific competition intervened. As American, French and South African scientists who knew about the findings headed to Zaire, the Belgian government realized it would be shutting out its own scientists, and it rushed Dr. Piot to its former colony to study the virus. Two Belgian nuns with Ebola had been evacuated from Yambuku to Kinshasa, Zaire's capital, and the specter loomed of an imminent, uncontrolled epidemic of Ebola among the millions living there and beyond. In the few hours he had before his plane left, Dr. Piot raced to amass as much protective gear as he could take along. In Zaire, he joined an international team of scientists who flew to Yambuku and mapped Ebola's spread, determining that the principal route was through unsterilized needles and syringes, contact with infected patients and touching bodies at funerals. They also collected blood from patients for later testing and prepared for the arrival of a larger and better equipped team to control the outbreak. In four months of field operations, other scientists also discovered a second outbreak of Ebola, in Sudan. Why the virus struck simultaneously in two distant areas with virtually no contact between them was a mystery just as are the current independent outbreaks of Ebola in West Africa and Congo. Dr. Piot, who has told much of this story in previous interviews with me and in his 2012 memoir, "No Time to Lose A Life in Pursuit of Deadly Viruses," expanded on it in a recent interview in light of the current epidemic in West Africa, the deadliest Ebola outbreak in history. He said he expected discovery of more viruses like Ebola. And despite today's much safer laboratory procedures, he added, such virulent pathogens could prove just as dangerous. "We were lucky not to get infected, not only in the laboratory but later on when I was drawing blood from patients and touching them," Dr. Piot said from England, where he is now the director of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. He was lucky in another way. In 1976, ordered to fly in a waiting helicopter to meet with visiting Belgian officials in Kinshasa, he smelled alcohol on the pilots' breaths and refused to go. Soon after it took off, the helicopter crashed. A few days later, Dr. Piot led a team to retrieve the decomposing bodies from the jungle. Despite the near misses, "what dominated was the absolute excitement of discovery," he said, adding "I didn't realize that we were making history in those days," and "I never imagined that Ebola would become a real public health problem because until now, the outbreaks, as dramatic as they may have been, have been fairly limited." Dr. Piot played a key role in another epidemic. He went to Zaire to investigate cases soon after AIDS was first recognized in the United States in 1981. Later, he directed the United Nations AIDS program for 10 years. This July, the normally cautious Dr. Piot sounded one of the first alarms that the Ebola epidemic in West Africa was out of control. He publicly called it "a mega crisis" that required militarylike logistics and control measures like isolation and quarantine of infected individuals and their contacts. He worried that his message about the world's tardy response to control Ebola might be hyperbolic, he said, but that he "would rather be accused of overreacting than responding too late or not doing enough." Now he believes he was "on target." But when asked about health organizations' widely varying projections of the extent of the current Ebola epidemic one worst case estimate said it could reach 1.4 million he said he "would definitely take them with a big grain of salt" because they are "not based on accurate current data, so there are too many unknowns." Dr. Piot returned to Yambuku to celebrate his 65th birthday in February, a month before Ebola was first identified in Guinea. Since then, he has not gone to the affected areas in West Africa because of his duties at the tropical medicine school. But there, driven by moral and practical issues, Dr. Piot has set up one of the rare programs to ensure that faculty and staff members who go to West Africa to work on Ebola will continue to be paid, and 163 have expressed interest in volunteering, he said. "The mortality to medical staff and nurses has been enormous and devastating," he told me. "Our colleagues are the most affected of all professions, paying a high price for their work, and also infecting others."
(SALT LAKE CITY) University of Utah biochemists have reported a new drug discovery tool against the Ebola virus. According to a study published in this week's online edition of Protein Science, they have produced a molecule, known as a peptide mimic, that displays a functionally critical region of the virus that is universally conserved in all known species of Ebola. This new tool can be used as a drug target in the discovery of anti Ebola agents that are effective against all known strains and likely future strains. The University of Utah (U of U) work, which was funded by the National Institutes of Health, was conducted by a large collaborative team led by Debra Eckert, Ph.D., research assistant professor of biochemistry, and Michael S. Kay, M.D., Ph.D., professor of biochemistry. Key contributions to this work were provided by Dr. John Dye's laboratory at theU.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID), the lab of Christopher P. Hill, D.Phil., professor and co chair of the U of U Department of Biochemistry, and a group led by Brett Welch, Ph.D. at Navigen, Inc., a Salt Lake City pharmaceutical discovery and development company. (Navigen has licensed exclusive rights to the technology from the U of U and is currently screening for drugs against the target.) The Utah scientists designed peptide mimics of a highly conserved region in the Ebola protein that controls entry of the virus into the human host cell, initiating infection. Importantly, the researchers were able to demonstrate this peptide target is suitable for use in high throughput drug screens. These kinds of screens allow rapid identification of potential new drugs from billions of possible candidates. Current experimental drugs generally target only one of Ebola's five species. "The current growing epidemic demonstrates the need for effective broad range Ebola virus therapies," says Dr. Tracy R. Clinton, lead author on the study. "Importantly, viral sequence information from the epidemic reveals rapid changes in the viral genome, while our target sequence remains the same. Therefore, our target will enable the discovery of drugs with the potential to treat any future epidemic, even if new Ebola virus strains emerge." Ebola is a lethal virus that causes severe hemorrhagic fever with a 50 percent to 90 percent mortality rate. There are five known species of the virus. Outbreaks have been occurring with increasing frequency in recent years, and an unprecedented and rapidly expanding Ebola outbreak is currently spreading through several countries in West Africa with devastating consequences. The development of an effective anti Ebola agent to protect against natural outbreaks and potential bioterror exposures is an urgent global health need. There are no approved anti Ebola agents, but a number of promising experimental drugs are being aggressively advanced to clinical trials to address the current crisis. Dr. Eckert notes, "Although the current push of clinical trials will hopefully lead to an effective treatment for the Zaire species causing the present epidemic, the same treatments are unlikely to be effective against future outbreaks of a different or new Ebola species. Development of a broadly acting therapy is an important long term goal that would allow cost effective stockpiling of a universal Ebola treatment." Of particular interest, this target was shown to be suitable for the discovery of mirror image peptide inhibitors (D peptides), which are promising drug candidates. Unlike natural peptides, they are not digested by enzymes in the blood. D peptides are also much simpler and less expensive to produce compared to the current most promising approach, antibodies. The Utah group has previously developed highly potent and broadly acting D peptide inhibitors of HIV entry, currently in preclinical studies, and is now adapting this approach to Ebola using the mimics developed in this study. In collaboration with Navigen, several promising lead D peptide inhibitors have already been identified. U of U and Navigen are now seeking additional funding to optimize these inhibitors and advance them into clinical trials in humans.
Is Ebola the Emperor Palpatine of epidemics? The Count Dracula of diseases? The Cruella de Vil of viruses? You'd think such arbitrary comparisons don't really serve any constructive purpose, but CNN beg to differ. On a segment about the disease, the news station's Ashleigh Banfield questioned whether Ebola was 'the Isis of biological agents', somehow finding common ground between a Sunni jihadist extremist group in the Middle East and an African virus. The outlandish analogy came just a day after the media outlet the self proclaimed 'Most Trusted Name in News' accused rivals Fox of trafficking in hysteria by being 'unscientific' and 'irresponsible'.
The exact origin, locations, and natural habitat (known as the "natural reservoir") of Ebola virus remain unknown. However, on the basis of available evidence and the nature of similar viruses, researchers believe that the virus is zoonotic (animal borne) and is normally maintained in an animal host that is native to the African continent. A similar host is probably associated with Ebola Reston which was isolated from infected cynomolgous monkeys that were imported to the United States and Italy from the Philippines. The virus is not known to be native to other continents, such as North America.
We investigated the potential involvement of domestic dogs in the occurrence or dissemination of Ebola virus hemorrhagic fever in humans. Based on a large serologic survey of dogs in the 2001 2002 Ebola outbreak area in Gabon, we found evidence that dogs can be infected by Ebola virus, a finding that raises important human health issues. The ELISA method was based on the use of Ebola virus Z antigens. Although cross reactions can occur with antibodies to other subtypes, the presence of these subtypes in our samples is unlikely because only the Zaire subtype circulates in the study area all patients and nonhuman primates tested in this part of central Africa were infected by the Zaire subtype alone. The 2 positive dogs in France, an apparently Ebola virus exempt part of the world, could be attributed to false positive reactions due to the calculation of the positivity cut off and the 1 400 serum dilution step used in the tests. We found that 40 of 159 dogs living in the 2001 2002 Ebola virus epidemic area had detectable Ebola virus specific IgG, indicating either true infection or simple antigenic stimulation. All the tests were standardized at the 1 400 serum dilution, and most serum specimens had high OD values even at higher dilutions, confirming the specificity of the reactions. These data are consistent with observations we made during the different Ebola outbreaks that occurred in Gabon and the Republic of Congo in recent years. We observed that some dogs ate fresh remains of Ebola virus infected dead animals brought back to the villages, and that others licked vomit from Ebola virus infected patients. Together, these findings strongly suggest that dogs can be infected by Ebola virus, and that some pet dogs living in affected villages were infected during the 2001 2002 human Ebola virus outbreak. No circulating Ebola antigens or viral DNA sequences (tested for by PCR) were detected in either positive or negative serum specimens, and attempts to isolate virus from these samples failed. These findings indicate either old, transient Ebola infection of the tested dogs, or antigenic stimulation. Symptoms did not develop in any of these highly exposed animals during the outbreak, a finding that tends to support antigenic stimulation, asymptomatic, or very mild Ebola virus infection. Wild animals, especially gorillas and chimpanzees, can also be infected by Ebola virus, but the infection is highly lethal and causes huge outbreaks and massive population declines (5,14). Other animals such as guinea pigs (15), goats (16), and horses (17) remain asymptomatic or develop mild symptoms after experimental infection, but Ebola virus infection has never been observed in these species in the wild. Thus, dogs appear to be the first animal species shown to be naturally and asymptomatically infected by Ebola virus. Asymptomatic Ebola infection in humans has also been observed during outbreaks (18) but is very rare. Although dogs can be asymptomatically infected, they may excrete infectious viral particles in urine, feces, and saliva for a short period before virus clearance, as observed experimentally in other animals. Given the frequency of contact between humans and domestic dogs, canine Ebola infection must be considered as a potential risk factor for human infection and virus spread. Human infection could occur through licking, biting, or grooming. Asymptomatically infected dogs could be a potential source of human Ebola outbreaks and of virus spread during human outbreaks, which could explain some epidemiologically unrelated human cases. Dogs might also be a source of human Ebola outbreaks, such as the 1976 Yambuku outbreaks in Democratic Republic of Congo (19), the 1995 Kikwit outbreak, some outbreaks that occurred in 1996 and 2004 in Gabon and Republic of Congo (5), and the 1976 (6), 1979 (20), and 2004 (21) outbreaks in Sudan, the sources of which are still unknown. Together, these findings strongly suggest that dogs should be taken into consideration during the management of human Ebola outbreaks. To confirm the potential human risk of Ebola virus infected dogs, the mechanisms of viral excretion (i.e. body fluids and virus kinetics of excretion) should be investigated during experimental canine infection. This research would also offer insights into the natural resistance of dogs. The canine seroprevalence rates in Libreville and Port Gentil, the 2 main towns of Gabon, were significantly higher than that observed in France, which suggests antigenic stimulation in these towns where no cases of Ebola infection have been observed. Epidemiologic investigations showed that most seropositive dogs in Libreville and Port Gentil had probably never had contact with an infected source (dead animal or human case patient), and that they had never visited the Ebola virus epidemic area, in theory ruling out true infection. They may therefore have come into contact with free viral antigens, transmitted by aerosol or, to a lesser extent, experienced conjunctival exposure to virus laden droplets of urine, feces, or blood of the unknown natural host. Ebola virus has been shown to be experimentally transmissible to rhesus monkeys by inhalation (22) and conjunctival exposure (23). Moreover, accidental transmission of Ebola virus to 2 rhesus monkeys that had no direct contact with experimentally infected monkeys was observed in a biocontainment laboratory, which also suggests aerosol, conjunctival, or oral transmission (24). The Ebola virus reservoir species appears to extend throughout central Africa, both in rural and urban areas and might therefore be a small terrestrial mammal or a bird. No good candidate species has yet been identified, despite extensive studies (25,26). Epidemiologic observations during the 1976 outbreaks in Democratic Republic of Congo and Sudan identified bats as a potential reservoir (6,20), and Ebola virus nucleotide sequences and Ebola virus like virus capsids were detected in rodents in the Central African Republic (27). The discovery of Ebola virus positive pet dogs in undeclared affected areas suggests that these animals live in close contact with the Ebola virus reservoir, and this finding should help to narrow the search. One striking result of this study is the significant increasing gradient of canine seroprevalence from France to the Ebola virus epidemic area, including from villages with and without human cases in the area. The Cochran Armitage test for trends in proportions showed that seroprevalence increased linearly from France (2 ), to major towns (8.9 ), then to Mekambo (15.2 ), and then to villages in the Ebola virus epidemic area (25.2 ). This trend is supported by the increasing seroprevalence as the sampling area approached human cases and animal sources (Cochran Armitage test, p 0.0001). These findings suggest that canine seroprevalence could reflect contact with the virus and, thus, virus activity in a given area and also the risk for human infection. The virus appears to jump from its natural host to humans only in specific, but unknown, conditions. Seroprevalence rates in dogs might serves as an indicator of Ebola virus in regions in which no animal deaths or human cases have been observed. In conclusion, this study offers the first evidence that dogs might be asymptomatically infected by Ebola virus in the wild. This finding has potential implications for preventing and controlling human outbreaks. The increasing canine seroprevalence gradient from low risk to at risk Ebola virus endemic areas indicates that this seroprevalence might be used as an epidemiologic indicator of virus circulation in regions where no other means of virus detection are available.
The Ferlite Scientific Research, Inc., Monkey Farm was located approximately 40 km South of Manila. After monkeys were captured in the wild, they were taken to Ferlite Farms which used open cages at their holding facilities soon thereafter they were moved to individual cages. Ferlite exported about 1,500 monkeys a year to the US, mostly from costal rain forests on the island of Mindanao. On October 2, 1989, 100 crab eating macaques () were flown from Ferlite Farms, to Amsterdam v a Tokyo and Taipei. From here they traveled to New York City and were then trucked down Interstate 95 to Reston. These monkeys were placed in Room F of the Hazelton facility to begin their quarantine period. The Hazelton facility already had about 500 macaque monkeys housed when this new shipment arrived. In any transcontinental shipment of animals, some animals are expected to die due to the traumatic experience. However, this particular shipment began seeing a far larger number of deaths than expected. By November 1, 29 of the 100 monkeys had died. Dan Dalgard, the Hazelton facility veterinarian dissected one of the dead monkeys searching for the cause of death. Inside, the body looked strange. Its inch long soft spleen had tripled in size and grown hard as a rock. There was blood in the intestines. After conducting several other necropsies he diagnosed the deaths as being caused by simian hemorrhagic fever virus (SHFV). The Hazelton facility veterinarian then sent samples of the monkey tissues to the United States Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID) for a conclusive diagnosis. Located 80 km north of Reston at Fort Detrick, Maryland, USAMRIID was established in 1969, with the mission of developing medical defenses against biological warfare threats. While USAMRIID's primary mission is Soldier protection, its scientists and their research have provided numerous non military benefits. USAMRIID is the only laboratory within the Department of Defense capable of studying highly hazardous viruses that require maximum containment at Biosafety Level 4 (BSL 4). A biosafety level is the level of the containment precautions required to isolate dangerous biological agents in an enclosed facility. The levels of containment range from the lowest biosafety level 1 to the highest at level 4. Filoviruses are classified as Biological Level 4 agents based on their person to person, high mortality rate, transmission, potential for aerosol infectivity and absence of vaccines and chemotherapy. At 10,000 square feet, the USAMRIID BSL 4 facility is the largest biological containment laboratory in the US. When dealing with biological hazards at this level, the use of a Hazmat suit and a self contained oxygen supply is mandatory. The entrance and exit of the laboratory contain multiple showers, a vacuum room, an ultraviolet light room and other safety precautions designed to destroy all traces of biohazards. Multiple airlocks are employed and are electronically secured to prevent both doors opening at the same time. All air and water service going to and coming from a Biosafety Level 4 laboratory undergo decontamination procedures. The Hazelton veterinarian haphazardly followed proper laboratory procedures and sent the frozen samples wrapped in tin foil to USAMRIID. By the time the samples reached the lab, they had thawed out and were dripping fluids. An Army scientist examined the tissues and concurred with the finding of simian hemorrhagic fever. While USAMRIID was analyzing the Reston samples, Hazelton lab workers began euthanizing the remaining animals in Room F. Over several days, however, sporadic deaths began occurring in several other rooms soon 30 monkeys from a different Ferlite Farms shipment were dead. Back at USAMRIID another researcher using ELISA (Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay), IFA (Immunofluorescence) and immunohistochemical staining discovered by electron microscopy that Ebola was responsible for the monkey deaths. The idea that a filovirus might burn through a ware house ten miles from the capital of the US greatly disturbed the army scientists. Their first consid eration was to identify the virus beyond question. At that time there were three filovirus tests. The first, Musoke, tested for Marburg. The second, Boniface, tested for Ebola Sudan. The third, Mayinga, named for a mission nurse who died in Kinshasa, tested for Ebola Zaire. When done cor rectly, a tested sample that matched a virus would glow under ultraviolet light. Peter Jahrling, an Army civilian virologist decided to conduct the tests himself. The Marburg roused no glow in the monkey cells the Ebola Sudan made them glow a little the Ebola Zaire lit them up like light bulbs. It was conclu sive the Reston monkeys had Ebola Zaire. Ebola is the poster child for virus outbreak scares because it spreads extremely fast and kills most of its victims causing them to bleed uncontrollably. Since being featured in Richard Preston's 1994 book, and several science fiction movies such as , Ebola has become a household word. The most well known epidemics of filovirus occurred in Zaire and Sudan in 1976. More than 600 cases were reported from these two outbreaks, with mortality rates of 88 in Zaire and 53 in Sudan. Both epidemics began with a first patient (called the index case) receiving treatment at a local medical clinic. The virus was transmitted by injections from used contaminated syringes. When Ebola infects a human host, the person's immune system shuts down and the person dies from hemorrhages coming from all the body's orifices. Tissue oxygenation is interrupted, causing critical organ failure (parenchymal) or clinical shock. The infected person has a very high fever, accompanied by a bad headache. This early stage mimics malaria or typhoid and thus the disease often remains undiagnosed. Then signs of Ebola start to appear. An Ebola patient can have blood standing in droplets on the eyelids and running from the tear ducts down the face. Blood can flow spontaneously from the nose, mouth, vagina, and rectum. The testicles swell up and are often destroyed. Ebola causes people to vomit masses of black blood with a distinctive appearance of "coffee grounds." As blood vessels burst and blood seeps into the skin, a spotty, bumpy rash spreads across the body, while small, star like hemorrhages appear beneath the skin. There is incredible abdominal pain that cannot be relieved. Finally, after about 10 days, most sufferers mercifully fall into a coma and die. Since 1967, 27 Ebola outbreaks have been reported. The largest outbreaks happened in 1967 in Zaire (280 deaths 88 mortality) and in 1995 also in Zaire, resulting in 250 deaths from 315 cases (mortality rate of 81 ). The most recent outbreak in February 2009 in Democratic Republic of the Congo resulted in 15 deaths from 32 cases (47 mortality rate) . Nonetheless, not one of these outbreaks resulted in a pandemic in fact, just the opposite. Since the first documented filovirus outbreak in 1967, there have been approximately 1,500 fatalities. Compared with other diseases, such as tuberculosis that is easily transmitted and quite pervasive, Ebola is quite rare. Indeed, the WHO expects 30 million people to die of TB during the next ten years. Typhoid fever kills over 600,000 people per year measles kills 1,000,000 people per year. Nonetheless, despite these realities, Ebola is seen as a predator on a killing spree. On November 28, 1989 nearly six weeks after monkeys began dying in Reston, USAMRIID verified the Ebola finding. The following day, representatives from USAMRIID, the CDC, and the Virginia Department of Health met and developed an action plan. The CDC would handle people USAMRIID would handle the monkeys and the monkey facility. Because of the threat that Ebola might spread to staff, Reston and the greater Washington, DC community, the Army determined that all remaining monkeys would be immediately euthanized. The first task was to determine how best to administer a solution to a building potentially full of Ebola. COL Gerald "Jerry" Jaax was in charge of eradicating the virus. An initial entry team examined the buildings layout, entrances, exits, and unprotected openings. LTC Nancy Jaax (wife of COL Jaax), a veterinarian and pathologist, and COL C. J. Peters, chief of USAMRIID's assessment division and in charge of the Reston operation, conducted a walkthrough to determine the condition of the monkeys and what problems an operations team might encounter blood, body fluids, as well as excited monkeys. Alarmingly, they also found that Hazelton staff and animal handlers were still working in the building without hazmat suits and most were unaware of the grave danger that they were in. On November 30, LTC Nancy Jaax and another officer donned Hazmat suits and began to euthanizing 65 monkeys. Crab eating Macaques males are considerably larger than females, weighing 5 kg to 9 kg compared to the 3 kg to 6 kg of female. Ketamine, a general anesthetic, was initially administered followed by xylazine an analgesia and finally T 61, a euthanasia solution. By late afternoon, the monkeys were dead and liver and spleen samples collected. The remains were then triple bagged for incineration or in some cases, a fuller evaluation at USAMRIID lab facilities. However, 450 monkeys remained alive. Nearly a week later, on December 5, a group of 91 Tangos broken up into two person teams entered the facility. 91 Tangos are animal care specialist that generally care, manage, treat, and clean government owned animals, with a primary responsibility of prevention and control of diseases transmitted from animal to humans. Consisting of mostly young soldiers, most were unfamiliar with encapsulating suits, the tools they would be working with, the behavior of monkeys or of the full potential of the medical problem they were facing. The same procedures used by LTC Nancy Jaax to put down the 65 monkeys were followed. The process was slow and the following day, one of the monkeys escaped. Efforts to net the animal were unsuccessful and only agitated the other monkeys. Shooting it was out of the question for fear that a loose round would end up somewhere unwanted. And, no one had thought of bringing a dart gun or other immobilizing device. Ultimately, it was decided to let the monkey roam freely and to try again the next day. "Several of us spent the better part of a day trying to catch it. When we talk about the Reston incident, we compare the frustration of that day with the Hollywood version in the movie 'Outbreak,' in which an infected monkey was coaxed from a tree and captured within minutes. It is a great example of reality vs. Hollywood". Finally the escapee was caught after it had jammed itself into a crevice leaving only its rump exposed. The creature was quickly euthanized. That afternoon, building decontamination efforts began chipping, scrubbing and bleaching. This continued for 11 days, followed by the introduction of . Strains of the species are used for sterilization control. This species produces spores resistance to dry heat or ethylene oxide and are used for testing the effectiveness of sterilization. When over exposed extensively to formaldehyde vapors, the spores die. Their death presumes all bacteria and viruses to be dead . About 6 00 p.m. on December 18, electric fry pans, set on high, volatized the formaldehyde crystals. For three days, the building was cooked. Finally it was determined that the building was decontaminated. Reston's three month ordeal with Ebola was over.
The dietary supplement industry is aware of public concern regarding the Ebola virus ("Ebola virus disease") and of the desire of the public to protect itself against this virus. The trade associations of the dietary supplement industry support the responsible sale and use of health promoting vitamins, minerals, herbs and other dietary supplements. We are unaware of any scientific data supporting the use of dietary supplements to prevent Ebola virus infection or treat Ebola virus disease. Furthermore, federal law does not allow dietary supplements to claim to treat any diseases, including Ebola virus disease. The American Herbal Products Association (AHPA), the Consumer Healthcare Products Association (CHPA), the Council for Responsible Nutrition (CRN), the Natural Products Association (NPA), and the United Natural Products Alliance (UNPA) are therefore endorsing the following unified advisory for marketers and retailers, as well as for consumers of dietary supplements While there are many dietary supplements that have much to offer in terms of enhancing general immune function, therapies for the treatment of Ebola virus disease should only be recommended by qualified healthcare professionals or public health authorities. The organizations supporting this advisory represent the majority of dietary supplement manufacturers. Each of the associations and its member companies remain committed to providing the American public with high quality products for supporting personal health and permitting "self care" choices. Each of the associations is also committed to recognizing that self care is discouraged for some health conditions. The current outbreak of Ebola virus disease is such a condition.
Geneva, Oct 6, IRNA The Ebola virus is transmitted among humans through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, faeces and vomit, the World Health Organization said on Monday. The Ebola virus has also been detected in breast milk, urine and semen. In a convalescent male, the virus can persist in semen for at least 70 days one study suggests persistence for more than 90 days. Saliva and tears may also carry some risk. However, the studies implicating these additional bodily fluids were extremely limited in sample size and the science is inconclusive, it said. WHO said that in studies of saliva, the virus was found most frequently in patients at a severe stage of illness. The whole live virus has never been isolated from sweat. The Ebola virus can also be transmitted indirectly, by contact with previously contaminated surfaces and objects. The risk of transmission from these surfaces is low and can be reduced even further by appropriate cleaning and disinfection procedures, WHO said. Not an airborne virus Ebola virus disease is not an airborne infection. Airborne spread among humans implies inhalation of an infectious dose of virus from a suspended cloud of small dried droplets. This mode of transmission has not been observed during extensive studies of the Ebola virus over several decades. Common sense and observation tell us that spread of the virus via coughing or sneezing is rare, if it happens at all. Epidemiological data emerging from the outbreak are not consistent with the pattern of spread seen with airborne viruses, like those that cause measles and chickenpox, or the airborne bacterium that causes tuberculosis. Theoretically, wet and bigger droplets from a heavily infected individual, who has respiratory symptoms caused by other conditions or who vomits violently, could transmit the virus over a short distance to another nearby person. This could happen when virus laden heavy droplets are directly propelled, by coughing or sneezing (which does not mean airborne transmission) onto the mucus membranes or skin with cuts or abrasions of another person. WHO is not aware of any studies that actually document this mode of transmission. On the contrary, good quality studies from previous Ebola outbreaks show that all cases were infected by direct close contact with symptomatic patients. No evidence for mutation of this virus Moreover, scientists are unaware of any virus that has dramatically changed its mode of transmission. For example, the H5N1 avian influenza virus, which has caused sporadic human cases since 1997, is now endemic in chickens and ducks in large parts of Asia. That virus has probably circulated through many billions of birds for at least two decades. Its mode of transmission remains basically unchanged. Speculation that Ebola virus disease might mutate into a form that could easily spread among humans through the air is just that speculation, unsubstantiated by any evidence. This kind of speculation is unfounded but understandable as health officials race to catch up with this fast moving and rapidly evolving outbreak. To stop this outbreak, more needs to be done to implement on a much larger scale well known protective and preventive measures. Abundant evidence has documented their effectiveness. 1416 1416
The Ebola virus is transmitted among humans through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, faeces and vomit. The Ebola virus has also been detected in breast milk, urine and semen. In a convalescent male, the virus can persist in semen for at least 70 days one study suggests persistence for more than 90 days. Saliva and tears may also carry some risk. However, the studies implicating these additional bodily fluids were extremely limited in sample size and the science is inconclusive. In studies of saliva, the virus was found most frequently in patients at a severe stage of illness. The whole live virus has never been isolated from sweat. The Ebola virus can also be transmitted indirectly, by contact with previously contaminated surfaces and objects. The risk of transmission from these surfaces is low and can be reduced even further by appropriate cleaning and disinfection procedures. Not an airborne virus Ebola virus disease is not an airborne infection. Airborne spread among humans implies inhalation of an infectious dose of virus from a suspended cloud of small dried droplets. This mode of transmission has not been observed during extensive studies of the Ebola virus over several decades. Common sense and observation tell us that spread of the virus via coughing or sneezing is rare, if it happens at all. Epidemiological data emerging from the outbreak are not consistent with the pattern of spread seen with airborne viruses, like those that cause measles and chickenpox, or the airborne bacterium that causes tuberculosis. Theoretically, wet and bigger droplets from a heavily infected individual, who has respiratory symptoms caused by other conditions or who vomits violently, could transmit the virus over a short distance to another nearby person. This could happen when virus laden heavy droplets are directly propelled, by coughing or sneezing (which does not mean airborne transmission) onto the mucus membranes or skin with cuts or abrasions of another person. WHO is not aware of any studies that actually document this mode of transmission. On the contrary, good quality studies from previous Ebola outbreaks show that all cases were infected by direct close contact with symptomatic patients. No evidence for mutation of this virus Moreover, scientists are unaware of any virus that has dramatically changed its mode of transmission. For example, the H5N1 avian influenza virus, which has caused sporadic human cases since 1997, is now endemic in chickens and ducks in large parts of Asia. That virus has probably circulated through many billions of birds for at least two decades. Its mode of transmission remains basically unchanged. Speculation that Ebola virus disease might mutate into a form that could easily spread among humans through the air is just that speculation, unsubstantiated by any evidence. This kind of speculation is unfounded but understandable as health officials race to catch up with this fast moving and rapidly evolving outbreak. To stop this outbreak, more needs to be done to implement on a much larger scale well known protective and preventive measures. Abundant evidence has documented their effectiveness.
The unprecedented Ebola outbreak has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, and a Spanish nurse has become the first person known to have contracted the virus outside of Africa. While President Barack Obama has said the US was planning measures to screen incoming air passengers for Ebola, the World Health Organisation's European director has said the spread of the virus across Europe is "quite unavoidable." As the outbreak of Ebola continues to spread, here is what you need to know about the disease. What is Ebola? Ebola is an acute viral disease, with its first known case appearing in 1976 in simultaneous outbreaks in Nzara, Sudan, and Yambuku, Democratic Republic of Congo, according to the WHO. It takes its name from the Ebola River near the latter Congolese village. Once infected, the virus will attack the victim's internal organs. A medical worker with children in the high risk area of the Elwa 3 centre run by Med cins Sans Fronti res Those infected will initially show symptoms including a fever, intense weakness, muscle pain, headache and a sore throat. This then develops into vomiting, diarrhoea, rashes, impaired kidney and liver function, and in some cases, a combination of internal and external bleeding. How is it spread? Fruit bats are thought to be the natural hosts of the virus. Humans become infected during close contact with the blood, organs and other bodily fluids of animals harbouring the disease. Other animals which have spread the disease in Africa include primates, monkeys, forest antelope and porcupines found ill or dead or in the rainforest. A mural in Monrovia, Liberia, highlights the Ebola crisis Human to human infection occurs when contact is made with broken skin or mucous membranes, or with the bodily fluids of carriers. Men who have recovered from the disease can have contagious semen for up to 7 weeks. The highly contagious nature of the disease means that areas that have come in contact with these fluids also become infected meaning that burying a person who has died from Ebola is problematic. How is it diagnosed? Before Ebola can be identified as the disease affecting a person, other conditions including malaria, typhoid fever, cholera, and other haemorrhagic fevers must be ruled out. More than 3,400 people in West Africa have died in the Ebola outbreak Laboratory tests can then be used to confirm the disease, but these samples are an extreme biohazard and tests must be carried out under controlled conditions. How is it treated? While Ebola vaccines are being tested, none are currently available for preventative use. There is no known cure for the disease. Patients must be treated in isolation where they are given fluids to prevent dehydration. The World Health Organisation has recommended those countries affected by Ebola should conduct exit screening for people with symptoms consistent with the infection. They have also urged anyone who has come into contact with the virus not to undertake international travel, unless their journey is part of an appropriate medical evacuation. President Barack Obama has said the US government would develop expanded screening of airline passengers for Ebola, both in the West African countries hit by the disease and the United States. A glossary of terms regularly used in relation to the Ebola outbreak Contact A person who has been near or in contact with a patient carrying a disease. Contracted When a person has developed or acquired a disease. Exposure When a person has been put at risk of becoming infected after coming into contact with something or somebody which is infectious. Screening In terms of the Ebola outbreak, this is a process carried out to assess whether a person may be exhibiting symptoms of the virus. It can include the person filling out a questionnaire and visual observation. Transmission When a virus is passed on from one patient to another. Quarantine When a person who is thought to be at risk of infection is isolated and separated from healthy people.
PHILADELPHIA (CBS) Most of us know a lot more about the Ebola virus than we knew a week ago, but the CDC has been on top of this for quite some time, and the World Health Organization has been monitoring it as well. That's very important because what we're finding is they know that's it's very difficult to spread the virus from person to person. You need direct contact, but you're talking about bodily fluids a much more difficult way of spreading the virus. Even in the case of linen or clothes, there have to be secretions present in order to make the spread more likely. But one of the biggest defenses against the virus is the fact that we can communicate very quickly. There are reports made now about anything that remotely resembles Ebola, allowing the CDC and other organizations to jump on it. That's very important because one of the best ways to control this is through making sure that other things in place such as neutralizing the spread through case management, surveillance, and contact treatment.
Receive News, Politics, and Entertainment Headlines Each Morning. By Noel McLaren PHILADELPHIA (CBS) James McArthur has seen a lot. For most of his career, he's been cleaning up biohazards for Bio One. One thing he never expected to suit up for, though, was the Ebola virus. "I'm going to tell you right now no. That's a big, fat, no," he said. "It seemed like something that was thousands of miles away." He says Bio One has a franchise branch in Texas that helped de contaminate first responder units that treated Ebola patient Thomas Duncan in Dallas. Now, he's making sure that if the virus comes to our area, he's armed and ready. The recipe to remove Ebola from a property is actually quite simple, but it can also be quite invasive. Biohizard clean up crews say the best way to eliminate the Ebola virus is to actually remove affected materials and incinerate them. "The number one thing to burn would be bedding, toothbrushes, anything the person or persons had physical contact with definitely burn," said McArthur. McArthur says most hard surfaces can be treated with chemicals to eliminate the virus, but left untreated, the Ebola virus can survive for weeks. "Ebola can actually live outside on a surface for 21 days, unlike most viruses or airborne bacteria. Normally, 14 is the max, but not Ebola that's one of the dangers with Ebola," he explained. McArthur hopes he never has to clean up the virus, but if it does make its way here, he hopes the homework he's doing now has his team ready. You may also be interested in these stories
CINCINNATI The largest Ebola outbreak in history is being held responsible for sickening more than 6,500 people and killing more than 3,000 others, according to the World Health Organization. And on Tuesday, the first case of the deadly disease in the US was confirmed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. But what is Ebola, and what are the risks? The disease, previously called the Ebola hemorrhagic fever, was first discovered in 1976 near the Ebola River in what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo, according to the CDC. It can be found in humans and nonhuman primates (monkeys, gorillas and chimpanzees) and is caused by an infection with one of five Ebola virus strains. Four of the strains can cause disease in humans. Where the Ebola virus first originated is not known, but the CDC says evidence points to an animal borne virus, with bats most likely the original culprit. The 2014 outbreak is the first Ebola epidemic in the world affecting several countries in West Africa, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lagos and Port Harcourt, Nigeria, and in Texas in the United States. Symptoms can appear anywhere from two to 21 days after exposure to the disease, with an average of eight to 10 days People who recover from the infection develop antibodies that last for at least 10 years. How do you become infected with Ebola? Because the origin of the virus is not known, the way the disease first appears in a human at the start of an outbreak isn't clear, says the CDC. But researchers believe the first patient to contract the virus is infected through contact with an animal that has Ebola. When an infection does occur in humans, the virus can spread in various ways to other people. Ebola is spread through direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with Those who are at the highest risk of contracting the virus are healthcare providers caring for Ebola patients and the family and friends in close contact with the diseased. This is due to the increased chance they will come in contact with infected blood or body fluids of sick patients. Once someone recovers from Ebola, they can no longer spread the virus. However, Ebola virus has been found in semen for up to three months. People who recover from the disease are advised to abstain from sex or use condoms for three months. How to prevent contracting Ebola An Ebola vaccine approved by the Federal Drug Administration is not available though many vaccines are currently being researched. If you travel to or are in an area affected by an Ebola outbreak, the CDC says to make sure to do the following Healthcare workers who may be exposed to people with Ebola should follow these steps
(EMAILWIRE.COM, October 07, 2014 ) Incline Village, NV A Home and Garden America Seed Expert feels that the recent Ebola scare, along with all the media attention, is fueling a renewed interest in survival plants and seeds. The Ebola virus is a disease of primates and humans with symptoms including rashes, vomiting and diarrhea. Later, these symptoms are accompanied by decreased function of the kidneys and liver. Then persons can begin bleeding either internally or externally or both. The main ways that the virus is known to spread are through contacts with bodily fluids such as blood, semen, etc. The first symptoms are similar to other viral hemorrhagic fevers, malaria and cholera so before one can be diagnosed with the Ebola Virus, these other conditions must be ruled out. Then blood tests are administered to detect the presence of the virus or other known indicators. "The preoccupation with survival preparedness has been waning over the past couple of years, since it's height at the end of December 2012 and the non fulfillment of the Mayan Calendar predictions." he said. "Now, it seems that people are beginning to renew that interest in self sufficiency and survival preparedness by purchasing emergency food supplies, water and survival seeds. We're certainly living in uncertain times and the Bible predicts famines and pestilence before the end of time so it's not a bad idea to prepare for these things." There are many companies selling survival supplies online as well in survivalist stores around the country. This is an indicator of the demand for this type of products that people feel will help them through any coming disasters whether short term or long term. "Concerning the Ebola Virus, there's nothing wrong with being prepared," he continued, "it makes no difference if you don't need these things because you can always use them up and then restock so they don't become outdated and less potent when you need them." About Home and Garden America Home and Garden America began as a home improvement company and later went into the bed and bath industry as a supplier of top of the line home furnishings. Plants and seeds are in the plans for future products..
Raleigh, N.C. Sen. Richard Burr on Sunday said that he is confident North Carolina has the resources to respond effectively to the Ebola virus, should there be a need. But the Republican member of the state's congressional delegation told WRAL News that local emergency and public health offices across the state should take time now to review their planned responses to, not only Ebola, but other infectious diseases. "North Carolina and every state in the country is more than equipped to handle any disease outbreak that we might have," Burr said. "It's a matter of reminding ourselves of exactly the procedures we've got to follow." Wake County is doing just that. The county's Board of Commissioners will receive an update at its 2 p.m. meeting Monday on the county's preparedness, should there be an Ebola outbreak in Wake County. Sen. Kay Hagan, who was unavailable for an interview Sunday, said in a statement that, she believes "we must remain vigilant to prevent any potential spreading of the Ebola virus within our borders." "Health care professionals should continue to be on high alert, and if additional cases are identified, appropriate follow up steps must be taken swiftly, including contact tracing to monitor those individuals who may be at risk," Hagan said. Burr also said Sunday that he believes the U.S. is far from an epidemic, echoing comments from the nation's top infectious diseases expert. Dr. Anthony Fauci, of the National Institute of Public Health, appeared Sunday morning on CBS's "Face the Nation," saying scientists in the U.S. know how to stop the virus from spreading. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has consulted with hospitals about more than 100 potentially suspicious cases in recent months. More than a dozen were worrisome enough to merit Ebola blood tests. Only one patient in Dallas has been diagnosed. Experts cite lack of experience with the disease, a shortage of medical supplies and personnel and widespread poverty as contributing factors to the spread of the disease in West Africa. The virus that causes Ebola is not airborne and can be spread only through close contact with someone who has symptoms. People have to come into direct contact with the patient's bodily fluids blood, sweat, vomit, feces, urine, saliva or semen and those fluids must have an entry point.
One of Ebola's most notorious symptoms is bleeding from places like the nose and mouth, but such bleeding has only occurred in a minority of cases in the current outbreak. It remains a mystery why some people experience this bleeding while others don't. The bleeding, which is properly called "hemorrhagic syndrome," happens in the late stages of the disease, about 24 to 48 hours before death. In the current West Africa outbreak, about 18 percent of people infected with the virus are developing hemorrhagic syndrome, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Typically, the Ebola virus leads to hemorrhagic syndrome about 30 percent to 50 percent of the time, said Angela Rasmussen, a research assistant professor of microbiology at the University of Washington. Ebola Virus 5 Things You Should Know Cases with bleeding are "usually quite severe and dramatic," Rasmussen told Live Science. "But many Ebola cases don't have that feature. And that feature only presents in the very late stages of the disease." The current Ebola outbreak is the worst on record. In Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, more than 7,400 people have become infected and more than 3,400 have died since the outbreak began in early 2014, according to the CDC. Nigeria also had a cluster of 20 cases, and Senegal, Spain and the United States have each reported one Ebola case. In fact, the relatively low prevalence of hemorrhagic syndrome in the current outbreak may explain why the outbreak remained under the radar for a time before it was recognized. "I have heard speculation that a lower incidence of hemorrhagic syndrome may explain why the outbreak may not have been recognized early on as being caused by Ebola," Rasmussen said, "since it was geographically outside of what we previously thought was the range for Zaire Ebola virus, and since without hemorrhage, it appears similar to malaria or typhoid." Ebola's mechanisms aren't entirely known, but like other severe viral infections, it starts with a fever, which is often followed by vomiting, diarrhea, body aches and nausea. The virus targets the immune system, infecting white blood cells and replicating itself until patients have high levels of the virus circulating throughout their body. Hemorrhagic syndromestems from the fact that as the virus grows in numbers, it can infect the liver, the organ that makes proteins that help the blood clot. Normally, clotting factors circulate throughout the body and stop bleeding where they're needed. In people with Ebola, the virus causes severe inflammation that can cause these clotting proteins to go into overdrive, and form small blood clots that clog blood vessels. These clots can also block the flow of blood to vital organs, such as the liver, brain or kidneys, leading to organ damage. Eventually, the body runs out of available clotting factors, and the infected liver is unable to make more, Rasmussen said. Meanwhile, the infected immune cells are going out of control, triggering a chaotic inflammatory response, Rasmussen said. In turn, the cells that line the body's blood vessels also become inflamed, and start to leak, which leads to hemorrhagic syndrome. It typically takes five to eight days for hemorrhagic syndrome to develop in patients with the Ebola virus, she said. After this amount of time, patients have very low levels of clotting factors, she said. Infected mice Rasmussen and her colleagues are learning more about the virus by studying its effects in mice. Rasmussen works in Seattle, but her collaborators work at Rocky Mountain Laboratories, a high security lab in Montana run by the National Institutes of Health. The team is examining how the Ebola virus affects different types of mice. About 20 to 25 percent of the infected mice develop only a mild case of Ebola. "They usually have weight loss," Rasmussen said. "They might be a little subdued behaviorally, but they usually recover their weight and survive." Another 30 to 40 percent of the mice develop severe symptoms, but no bleeding. They have pale colored livers, indicating severe hepatitis. "They just die before or without developing those hemorrhagic symptoms," she said. About 40 percent of the mice develop full blown hemorrhagic syndrome, Rasmussen said. Their blood won't clot at the time of their death, and they have low levels of serum fibrinogen, a molecule important for clotting. "The ones that do develop the hemorrhagic syndrome usually die between days seven and 10," Rasmussen said. "And that's pretty similar to what we see in humans." Bleeding can happen throughout the body. Infected people may have internal bleeding, or may find petechial rashes a sign that the capillaries within the skin are bleeding. " Bleeding can take on a variety of shapes and forms, with the worst cases being people vomiting blood, having bloody diarrhea, bleeding from their nose and mouth and where the sun don't shine," Rasmussen said. Mouse genetics may help researchers learn why some people develop hemorrhagic syndrome and others don't. Rasmussen and her colleagues are examining whether any genetic factors predispose an individual to developing the bleeding, she said. Ebola isn't the only virus that causes hemorrhagic syndrome. Dengue virus, often seen in the world's tropical areas, and Lassa fever, seen in West Africa, can lead to bleeding. Marburg, a virus carried by bats, also causes similar symptoms.
Peter Piot was among a group of researchers to have first discovered the Ebola virus in 1976. Professor Peter Piot, director of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine who named Ebola and was part of a team of scientists who discovered the virus in Kinshasa, formerly Zaire, in 1976, says the Ebola outbreak is no longer an epidemic but a "human catastrophe" he never thought "could get this bad." "It should be clear to all of us This isn't just an epidemic any more. This is a humanitarian catastrophe. We don't just need care personnel, but also logistics experts, trucks, jeeps and foodstuffs. Such an epidemic can destabilize entire regions. I can only hope that we will be able to get it under control. I really never thought that it could get this bad," said Piot when asked if the world had lost control of the Ebola epidemic in an interview with The Guardian. "I have always been an optimist and I think that we now have no other choice than to try everything, really everything. It's good that the United States and some other countries are finally beginning to help. But Germany or even Belgium, for example, must do a lot more," he explained. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention the 2014 Ebola epidemic is the largest in history, affecting multiple countries in West Africa. Some 7,470 cases of Ebola have been reported in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, and 3,431 of them have died. Cases have also been reported in Nigeria and Senegal, and the United States confirmed its first case of the deadly disease in Dallas, Texas, a week ago. Piot, who named Ebola after the Ebola River in the Democratic Republic of Congo, explained that the catastrophic outbreak of the virus was caused by what he calls a "perfect storm." "I think it is what people call a perfect storm when every individual circumstance is a bit worse than normal and they then combine to create a disaster. And with this epidemic there were many factors that were disadvantageous from the very beginning. Some of the countries involved were just emerging from terrible civil wars, many of their doctors had fled and their healthcare systems had collapsed. In all of Liberia, for example, there were only 51 doctors in 2010, and many of them have since died of Ebola," he said. Piot explained that if Ebola hits large cities, it will be almost impossible to track and lead to an "unimaginable catastrophe." "In large cities, particularly in chaotic slums, it's virtually impossible to find those who had contact with patients, no matter how great the effort. That is why I'm so worried about Nigeria as well. The country is home to mega cities like Lagos and Port Harcourt, and if the Ebola virus lodges there and begins to spread, it would be an unimaginable catastrophe," he emphasized. Piot, however, expressed confidence that an Ebola outbreak in Europe or North America would be quickly brought under control when asked if he thought the outbreak was the beginning of a pandemic. "There will certainly be Ebola patients from Africa who come to us in the hopes of receiving treatment. And they might even infect a few people here who may then die. But an outbreak in Europe or North America would quickly be brought under control," he said. "I am more worried about the many people from India who work in trade or industry in West Africa. It would only take one of them to become infected, travel to India to visit relatives during the virus's incubation period, and then, once he becomes sick, go to a public hospital there. Doctors and nurses in India, too, often don't wear protective gloves. They would immediately become infected and spread the virus," Piot explained.
With more than 6500 cases of the Ebola virus in West Africa, 3000 deaths and now one confirmed case in the United States, scientists are trying to find a way to detect the deadly virus more quickly, cheaply and easily. And they're increasingly using nanotechnology to do it. A team of researchers at Boston University's College of Engineering and its School of Medicine has been working for the past five years to develop a portable device that uses a silicon chip to diagnose a patient with Ebola, or other hemorrhagic fever diseases like the Marburg virus or Lassa Fever. What's potentially important about this diagnostic device is that it could easily be used in remote areas with limited electrical and medical resources. "What motivates us is that there are some really good tests to diagnose these diseases but none of these tests are easily transported where they are needed," said John H. Connor, an associate professor in BU's Department of Microbiology and a virologist on the research team. "They have to fly in heavy, electricity requiring machines that require specialized training and special ingredients to make the diagnostics work properly. They're expensive, time intensive and, most importantly, they're pretty much locked to a clinical lab." That's a problem for countries like Liberia, which has suffered more than 3,400 cases of Ebola and more than 1,800 deaths in this outbreak, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The World Health Organization (WHO) has reported that the Ebola virus, once known as Ebola hemorrhagic fever, is one of the world's most virulent diseases, with a fatality rate of approximately 90 . Spread by direct contact with the blood, fluids and tissues of infected animals or people, authorities have attempted to contain the outbreak, which began in Guinea and has spread to other countries, including Liberia and Nigeria, which have both declared health emergencies because of it. Liberia, for example, simply doesn't have the resources to dot the countryside with well equipped, high tech clinics that can run traditional diagnostic machines. Connor said his research team, which includes scientists from the University of Texas Medical Branch, are even more focused after learning that there's a patient in the U.S. with Ebola. But, he said, people around the world have been suffering from hemorrhagic fever diseases for a long time and that has motivated them all along. "We would love to be able to provide technology where it could be taken out from the clinical lab and provide it at the point of care, the point of need," he added. "The number of problems that face diagnosis and care are minimized in the United States but they're huge overseas." Connor explained that the researchers put antibodies on a silicon chip. The antibodies, a naturally occurring protein used by the immune system to identify and attack viruses and bacteria, can grab onto the Ebola virus. Researchers then can flow a patient's blood over the chip and, if there's Ebola virus present in the blood, the antibody will capture it. Field workers could then tell if there's virus on the chip by shining light from multicolor LED sources on the viral nanoparticles. "When we bounce the light off of it, you see a spectrum that changes when there's a virus particle present," Connor told Computerworld, adding that the spectrum acts as a distinct signal denoting the specific size and shape of each nanoparticle. "The spectrum changes based on the virus. It's large enough for us to very easily see." With enough funding, the diagnostic device could be ready to be used in six months, but, Connor said, it's more realistic to expect it to be in official use in about two years. The BU based team isn't the only one using nanotechnology to try to fight the 2014 Ebola outbreak, which is the largest in history and the first Ebola epidemic the world has ever known, according to the CDC. In August, scientists at Northeastern University reported that they have been using nanotechnology to find an effective treatment for the virus. What makes finding a vaccine or cure such a challenging job is that the virus mutates so quickly. How do you pin down and treat something that is continually changing? Thomas Webster, professor and chairman of bioengineering and chemical engineering at Northeastern, said nanotechnology may be the answer to that problem. Webster is working to develop nanoparticles that can stop the Ebola virus from mutating, and then kill it. The ability to do that would be a game changer in fighting this virus, according to researchers. "Since viruses, like Ebola, are nanostructures, many of us believe the only way to treat them is by using other nanomaterials," Webster said in a previous interview. "In nanotechnology, we turned our attention to developing nanoparticles that could be attached chemically to the viruses and stop them from spreading." 2014 ARN Women in ICT Awards Nominate Now! Nominations have opened for WIICTA 2014 and will stay open until October 22. But don't be late, be among the first in and NOMINATE NOW!!!
University of Utah biochemists have reported a new drug discovery tool against the Ebola virus. According to a study published in this week's online edition of Protein Science, they have produced a molecule, known as a peptide mimic, that displays a functionally critical region of the virus that is universally conserved in all known species of Ebola. This new tool can be used as a drug target in the discovery of anti Ebola agents that are effective against all known strains and likely future strains. The University of Utah (U of U) work, which was funded by the National Institutes of Health, was conducted by a large collaborative team led by Debra Eckert, Ph.D., (research assistant professor of biochemistry) and Michael Kay, M.D., Ph.D., (professor of biochemistry). Key contributions to this work were provided by Dr. John Dye's laboratory at the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID), the lab of Christopher P. Hill, D.Phil., professor and co chair of the U of U Department of Biochemistry, and a group led by Brett Welch, Ph.D. at Navigen, Inc., a Salt Lake City pharmaceutical discovery and development company. (Navigen has licensed exclusive rights to the technology from the U of U and is currently screening for drugs against the target.) The Utah scientists designed peptide mimics of a highly conserved region in the Ebola protein that controls entry of the virus into the human host cell, initiating infection. Importantly, the researchers were able to demonstrate this peptide target is suitable for use in high throughput drug screens. These kinds of screens allow rapid identification of potential new drugs from billions of possible candidates. Current experimental drugs generally target only one of Ebola's five species. "The current growing epidemic demonstrates the need for effective broad range Ebola virus therapies," says Dr. Tracy R. Clinton, lead author on the study. "Importantly, viral sequence information from the epidemic reveals rapid changes in the viral genome, while our target sequence remains the same. Therefore, our target will enable the discovery of drugs with the potential to treat any future epidemic, even if new Ebola virus strains emerge." Ebola is a lethal virus that causes severe hemorrhagic fever with a 50 percent to 90 percent mortality rate. There are five known species of the virus. Outbreaks have been occurring with increasing frequency in recent years, and an unprecedented and rapidly expanding Ebola outbreak is currently spreading through several countries in West Africa with devastating consequences. The development of an effective anti Ebola agent to protect against natural outbreaks and potential bioterror exposures is an urgent global health need. There are no approved anti Ebola agents, but a number of promising experimental drugs are being aggressively advanced to clinical trials to address the current crisis. Dr. Eckert notes, "Although the current push of clinical trials will hopefully lead to an effective treatment for the Zaire species causing the present epidemic, the same treatments are unlikely to be effective against future outbreaks of a different or new Ebola species. Development of a broadly acting therapy is an important long term goal that would allow cost effective stockpiling of a universal Ebola treatment." Of particular interest, this target was shown to be suitable for the discovery of mirror image peptide inhibitors (D peptides), which are promising drug candidates. Unlike natural peptides, they are not digested by enzymes in the blood. D peptides are also much simpler and less expensive to produce compared to the current most promising approach, antibodies. The Utah group has previously developed highly potent and broadly acting D peptide inhibitors of HIV entry, currently in preclinical studies, and is now adapting this approach to Ebola using the mimics developed in this study. In collaboration with Navigen, several promising lead D peptide inhibitors have already been identified. U of U and Navigen are now seeking additional funding to optimize these inhibitors and advance them into clinical trials in humans.
NOVOSIBIRSK, October 7 (RIA Novosti) The Ebola epidemic is prone to spreading in poor West African countries with little medicine, whereas industrialized states, including Russia would only face minor local outbreaks of the virus if affected, Alexander Bukreyev, professor of pathology, microbiology and immunology at the Galveston National Laboratory in Texas, said Tuesday. "I doubt a pandemic, to be honest. But the big epidemic in Africa, in the poorest countries with low levels of health and education of the population is possible ... In industrialized countries, in Russia, I do not think that the epidemic is going to happen. But local outbreaks may occur which I'm sure could be extinguished at the very early stages," the professor told journalists in Novosibirsk. Bukreyev believes that the "hysteria" surrounding the Ebola virus is not unreasonable since there is currently no official cure or treatment against it. "Yes, hysteria, but sometimes I see in the media all these fantastic conspiracy theories that do not correspond to reality. But in general hysteria is understandable. Such outbreaks of the virus did not exist before," Bukreyev said. The professor noted that the Ebola virus rarely mutates, which allows scientists to develop vaccines and therapeutic drugs from it without fear that the virus will quickly change. "There are already three or four projects concerning the current outbreak of the virus with a bunch of decoded genomes of Ebola. Everything indicates that it does not greatly change like HIV or hepatitis C. Each outbreak is a little different with its specific mutations, but they are not radically different viruses," Bukreyev said. According to the professor, these findings will hopefully lead to the development of an effective experimental vaccine in the near future. Ebola is a severe hemorrhagic virus which is plaguing West African countries including Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal. A separate outbreak in the Republic of Congo has also been reported. According to the World Health organization (WHO), some 3,431 people have died as a result of the current Ebola epidemic, the largest outbreak of the virus to date. There is currently no approved cure for the virus though several countries including Russia, the United States, the United Kingdom and Japan, are working on vaccines against it.
Fear not Palm Beach County weightlifters, yoga gurus and treadmill devotees. The gym is at least one place that you are likely safe from the Ebola virus, Palm Beach County commissioners learned Tuesday. Health Department Director Dr. Alina Alonso on Tuesday was updating the County Commission on local preparations to deal with the potential spread of the deadly Ebola virus. While explaining that the virus spreads through contact with the blood, sweat and other bodily fluids of someone infected with the virus, Alonso took a question from County Mayor Priscilla Taylor. The mayor wanted to know if Ebola could be contracted by sharing workout equipment or other sweaty encounters at a gym. "We assume that no one has it, but we don't know," Taylor said. Taylor and other local exercisers shouldn't let Ebola fears get in the way of efforts to melt away the pounds, according to Alonso. Someone sick with Ebola doesn't just break a light sweat during a workout. Instead they would likely be vomiting, bleeding from multiple orifices and sweating enough to soak through their cloths and their bedding, Alonso said. "A person with Ebola would not likely be exercising in a gym," Alonso said. The main risk of the Ebola virus continues to be for people who have traveled to West Africa recently or who have come in direct contact with someone who has been to West Africa, Alonso said. She told commissioners that the Health Department is working with local hospitals, law enforcement and the airport to coordinate how to respond if someone suffering from the Ebola virus named after a river in Africa ends up in Palm Beach County. Figuring that it's never too early for a little infectious disease humor, Commissioner Hal Valeche had a suggestion for African chamber of commerce officials. "They might want to consider a name change for the Ebola River," Valeche said.
ROSEAU, Dominica (CMC) The main opposition United Workers Party (UWP) Monday called on the organisers of the World Creole Music Festival (WCMF) to say what steps have been taken to prevent the possibility of the Ebola virus being detected here. UWP leader, Lennox Linton, told a news conference that at least one band from Nigeria is expected to perform at the October 24 26 festival. "If this band is going to come here having been in an African country to which they were exposed to the virus, it must be possible at this stage to begin the process of ascertaining whether any of these band members are being exposed to risk factors that would make their arrival on our shores or present some difficulties when they arrive on our shores," Linton told reporters. "If the government's ministry of health is unable to do that, the preferable thing to do would be to deny entry for that one band," he added. More than 3,000 people have died in West Africa from the Ebola virus for which there is no known cure. The time between acquiring an infection and showing symptoms and signs varies from two to 21 days. The virus is highly infectious and is spread by person to person transmission through direct contact with bodily fluids or secretions of infected persons including blood, sweat, urine or faeces. Symptoms include fever, intense weakness, muscle pain, headache and sore throat, vomiting, diarrhea, external bleeding and rash. "We cannot hide from it but we can prepare ourselves as effectively as we can, given the resources available to us and the best practices that have emerged in other countries for screenings, and overall coping," he said, urging the authorities here to be proactive in their approach to the disease. "Ebola is not here yet but chikungunya has been here and when we look back on how we dealt with it, the record will show that we were not sufficiently proactive, nor were we effective in aligning necessary resources and to a proper strategy for coping, which is what we need to do with this Ebola virus," he said.
The BBC wants to hear about your experiences of the Ebola virus, which has spread rapidly in recent months, particularly in parts of West Africa. According to the latest UN figures, close to 3,500 people have died of Ebola in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone and in total there have been 7,470 cases. Do you have a family member who has Ebola or has recovered from the virus? How is your family coping with the disease? Are you a healthcare worker in the affected region? We would also like to hear from people who can record their experiences on video and or audio and provide regular updates without endangering themselves.
Local experts say there is no reason to panic over Ebola, and the best way to stop fear is education. A common concern people have regarding the disease is the risk of contracting it. But experts said that risk is low. "People pretty much have to be showing active symptoms in order for you to catch this type of disease," Doctor John Torres said. "You have to have close contact, it's not like the flu. It's not like the cold that you can be in the same room and catch it. Instead, Ebola you pretty much have to have contact with body fluids or the body itself. Even if someone is coughing or sneezing if you're in the same room, you really don't have much to worry about. But if they happen to cough or sneeze on you, that's then when the concern goes a little bit higher." Some wonder, if the risk is low, why are people often seen wearing HAZMAT suits, like the crew going into the apartment where the Ebola patient in Dallas stayed. "That's a clean up crew, so they're going in to clean up those messy areas. They need to be very careful," Torres said. "There are a lot of bodily fluids left there. The virus can't handle being outside the body for very long, but if it's inside the body fluids we're talking if somebody has diarrhea, if somebody vomits, bloody vomit, that type of thing those body fluids themselves are going to have the virus in them, and that can stay around a long time." Another misconception is that Ebola is or will become airborne. "There's no evidence to suggest it's going to get airborne, and I regard it as more than a million to one, in terms of the probability for that, more like a billion to one," Colorado College Associate Professor Andrew Price Smith said. Price Smith has been an associate adviser to the National Intelligence Council since 2008. He specializes in the effects of disease, environmental change and energy flows and scarcity on the security of nations. He said there should be no concern about the possibility of Ebola spreading throughout the United States. But there are other concerns. "What (people) should be worried about is the potential for greater importation of the disease through infected people coming from other parts of the world into the country," he said. "That's a real issue that people may get through the screening process at airports, they may cheat the system, otherwise lie or try to reduce their temperatures." Price Smith said the U.S needs to take the leadership in fighting Ebola because the World Health Organization doesn't have the resources to do it and the United Nations won't be able to do it in time. He supports sending troops to West Africa to build treatment units, even though training won't be easy. "We worry about the troops getting infected and repatriating it or bringing it to the USA," he said. "On the other hand, if the Department of Defense isolates soldiers, if they've potentially been exposed, for a period of up to 21 days, then I see the prospects of re importation of disease back into the US as pretty low."
Holy moly! There's a case of Ebola in the U.S.! That first reaction was understandable. There's no question the disease is scary. The World Health Organization now estimates that the virus has killed about 70 percent of people infected in West Africa. The Ebola case in Dallas is the first one diagnosed outside Africa, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Tuesday. And the health care system in Texas didn't quarantine the man right away. He was sick with Ebola and contagious for four days before he was admitted to the hospital. But when you look at health officials responding to the case in Dallas, they seem cool as cucumbers, despite the initial misstep. "I have no doubt that we will control this importation, or case, of Ebola so that it does not spread widely in this country," said the director of the CDC, Dr. Tom Frieden. Why is Frieden so sure this virus won't spread beyond a handful of cases? It boils down to something called "R0." The reproduction number, or "R nought," is a mathematical term that tells you how contagious an infectious disease is. Specifically, it's the number of people who catch the disease from one sick person, on average, in an outbreak. Take, for example, measles. The virus is one of the most contagious diseases known to man. It's R0 sits around 18. That means each person with the measles spreads it to 18 people, on average, when nobody is vaccinated. (When everyone is vaccinated, the R0 drops to essentially zero for measles). At the other end of the spectrum are viruses like HIV and hepatitis C. Their R0s tend to fall somewhere between 2 and 4. They're still big problems, but they spread much more slowly than the measles. And that brings us back to Ebola. Despite its nasty reputation, the virus's R0 really isn't that impressive. It typically sits around 1.5 to 2.0. Even in the current epidemic in West Africa, where the virus has been out of control, each person who has gotten sick has spread Ebola to only about two others, on average. Why is that? Many factors contribute to the R0, such as how long you're infectious and how many virus particles are needed to make another person sick. But in Ebola's case, the mode of transmission probably helps keep its R0 low. Ebola isn't spread through the air, like the measles or flu. It requires close contact with some bodily fluid, such as blood or vomit, containing the virus. Now at this point, you're probably thinking, "OK. But an R0 of 2 is nothing to brush off." You're right. R0 of 2 means one person infects two people, who then infect four people, then eight, 16, 32 the numbers go up fast. But that isn't likely to happen in a place with a good public health system, like the U.S. Why? Because people with Ebola aren't contagious until they show symptoms. So to stop the chain of transmission, all health workers in Texas have to do is get the people possibly infected by the sick man into isolation before these people show signs of Ebola. Then R0 drops to zero. And Texas is free of Ebola. We're talking the "basic" R0 here, for all you epidemiologists. So, the R0 that you get when everyone in the population is susceptible to the disease. The R0 is integrated over the time that a person is infectious to others. For HIV, this could be years. But for Ebola, that time is only about a week. So even though they have similar R0s, Ebola's infections per unit of time is much higher than HIV's. Copyright 2014 NPR.
Q. Should you avoid contact with a dog that was petted by someone with the flu? A. The possibility of transmission cannot be ruled out, medical studies suggest, but it would seem to require a perfect storm of bad personal hygiene and other conditions. Most experts believe that the usual transmission route is by way of minute droplets in the air that are inhaled or swallowed by someone within six feet of the source. Much less often, the next victim may touch a surface with living viruses on it, then touch his or her nose or mouth. Contact with such surfaces, called fomites, is a far less efficient way to spread the virus than the airborne route, according to an animal study published in The Journal of Infectious Diseases in 2009. Another study found that the virus could survive for several days on bank notes, but only if there was a large dose of virus to begin with, protected by a considerable amount of respiratory mucus. It appears likely that merely petting a dog would not transfer enough flu virus for infection unless the person had sneezed or coughed mucus onto the petting hand. For the virus to survive, it would have to remain moist and at the right temperature until the next person came along to pet the dog. question nytimes.com
BETHESDA, Md. U.S. officials leading the fight against history's worst outbreak of Ebola have said they know the ways the virus is spread and how to stop it. They say that unless an air traveler from disease ravaged West Africa has a fever of at least 101.5 degrees or other symptoms, fellow passengers are not at risk. "At this point there is zero risk of transmission on the flight," Dr. Thomas Frieden, director of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), said after a Liberian man who flew through airports in Brussels and Washington, D.C., was diagnosed with the disease last week in Dallas. Other public health officials have voiced similar assurances, saying Ebola is spread only through physical contact with a symptomatic individual or their bodily fluids. "Ebola is not transmitted by the air. It is not an airborne infection," said Dr. Edward Goodman of Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, where the Liberian patient remains in critical condition. Yet some scientists who have long studied Ebola say such assurances are premature and they are concerned about what is not known about the current strain. It is an Ebola outbreak like none seen before, jumping from the bush to urban areas, giving the virus more opportunities to evolve as it passes through multiple human hosts. Dr. C.J. Peters, who battled a 1989 outbreak of the virus among research monkeys housed in Virginia and who later led the CDC's most far reaching study of Ebola's transmissibility in humans, said he would not rule out the possibility that it spreads through the air in tight quarters. "We just don't have the data to exclude it," said Peters, who continues to research viral diseases at the University of Texas in Galveston. Dr. Philip Russell, a virologist who oversaw Ebola research while heading the U.S. Army's Medical Research and Development Command, and who later led the government's massive stockpiling of smallpox vaccine after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, also said much was still to be learned. "Being dogmatic is, I think, ill advised, because there are too many unknowns here." If Ebola were to mutate on its path from human to human, said Russell and other scientists, its virulence might wane or it might spread in ways not observed during past outbreaks, which were stopped after transmission among just two to three people, before the virus had a greater chance to evolve. The current outbreak in West Africa has killed approximately 3,400 people, and there is no medical cure for Ebola. "I see the reasons to dampen down public fears," Russell said. "But scientifically, we're in the middle of the first experiment of multiple, serial passages of Ebola virus in man. ... God knows what this virus is going to look like. I don't." Tom Skinner, a spokesman for the CDC in Atlanta, said health officials were basing their response to Ebola on what has been learned from battling the virus since its discovery in Central Africa in 1976. The CDC remains confident, he said, that Ebola is transmitted principally by direct physical contact with an ill person or their bodily fluids. Skinner also said the CDC is conducting lab analyses to assess whether the present strain of Ebola is mutating in ways that would require the government to change its policies on responding to it. The results so far have not provided cause for concern, he said. But researchers reached in recent days cited grounds to question U.S. officials' assumptions in three categories. Will airport screenings work? One issue is whether airport screenings of prospective travelers to the U.S. from West Africa can reliably detect those who might have Ebola. Frieden has said the CDC protocols used at West African airports can be relied on to prevent more infected passengers from coming to the U.S. "One hundred percent of the individuals getting on planes are screened for fever before they get on the plane," Frieden said Sept. 30. "And if they have a fever, they are pulled out of the line, assessed for Ebola, and don't fly unless Ebola is ruled out." Individuals who have flown recently from one or more of the affected countries suggested that travelers could easily subvert the screening procedures and might have incentive to do so Compared with the depleted medical resources in the West African countries of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, the prospect of hospital care in the U.S. may offer an Ebola exposed person the only chance to survive. A person could pass body temperature checks at the airports by taking ibuprofen or any common analgesic. And prospective passengers have much to fear from identifying themselves as sick, said Kim Beer, a resident of Freetown, Sierra Leone, who is working to get medical supplies into the country to cope with Ebola. "It is highly unlikely that someone would acknowledge having a fever or simply feeling unwell," Beer said via email. "Not only will they probably not get on the flight they may even be taken to or required to go to a 'holding facility' where they would have to stay for days until it is confirmed that it is not caused by Ebola. That is just about the last place one would want to go." Liberian officials said last week that the patient hospitalized in Dallas, Thomas Eric Duncan, did not report to airport screeners that he had had previous contact with an Ebola stricken woman. It is unclear whether Duncan knew she suffered from Ebola her family told neighbors it was malaria. The potential disincentive for passengers to reveal their own symptoms was echoed by Sheka Forna, a dual citizen of Sierra Leone and Britain, who manages a communications firm in Freetown. Forna said he considered it "very possible" that people with fever would medicate themselves to appear asymptomatic. It would be perilous to admit even nonspecific symptoms at the airport, Forna said in an interview. "You'd be confined to wards with people with full blown disease." On Monday, the White House announced that a review was under way of existing airport procedures. Frieden and President Obama's assistant for homeland security and counterterrorism, Lisa Monaco, said Friday that closing the U.S. to passengers from the Ebola affected countries would risk obstructing relief efforts. What counts as a symptom? CDC officials also say that asymptomatic patients cannot spread Ebola. This assumption is crucial for assessing how many people are at risk of getting the disease. Yet diagnosing a symptom can depend on subjective understandings of what constitutes a symptom, and some may not be easily recognizable. Is a person mildly fatigued because of short sleep the night before a flight or because of the early onset of disease? Moreover, said some public health specialists, there is no proof that a person who is infected but lacks symptoms could not spread the virus to others. "It's really unclear," said Michael Osterholm, a public health scientist at the University of Minnesota who recently served on the U.S. government's National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity. "None of us know." Russell, who oversaw the Army's research on Ebola, said he found the epidemiological data unconvincing. "The definition of 'symptomatic' is a little difficult to deal with," he said. "It may be generally true that patients aren't excreting very much virus until they become ill, but to say that we know the course of (the virus' entry into the bloodstream) and the course of when a virus appears in the various secretions, I think, is premature." The CDC's Skinner said that while officials remained confident that Ebola can be spread only by the overtly sick, the continuing studies would assess whether mutations that might occur could increase the potential for asymptomatic patients to spread it. How can it spread? Finally, some also question the official assertion that Ebola cannot be transmitted through the air. In late 1989, virus researcher Charles Bailey supervised the government's response to an outbreak of Ebola among several dozen rhesus monkeys housed for research in Reston, Va. What Bailey learned from the episode informs his suspicion that the current strain of Ebola afflicting humans might be spread through tiny liquid droplets propelled into the air by coughing or sneezing. "We know for a fact that the virus occurs in sputum and no one has ever done a study (disproving that) coughing or sneezing is a viable means of transmitting," he said. Unqualified assurances that Ebola is not spread through the air, Bailey said, are "misleading." Peters, whose CDC team studied cases from 27 households that emerged during a 1995 Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo, said that while most could be attributed to contact with infected late stage patients or their bodily fluids, "some" infections may have occurred via "aerosol transmission." Skinner, who cited the Peters led study as the most extensive on Ebola's transmissibility, said that while the evidence "is really overwhelming" that people are most at risk when they touch either those who are sick or such a person's vomit, blood or diarrhea, "we can never say never" about spread through close range coughing or sneezing. "I'm not going to sit here and say that if a person who is highly viremic ... were to sneeze or cough right in the face of somebody who wasn't protected, that we wouldn't have a transmission," Skinner said. Peters, Russell and Bailey, who in 1989 was deputy commander for research of the Army's Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, in Frederick, Md., said the primates in Reston had appeared to spread Ebola to other monkeys through their breath. The Ebola strain found in the monkeys did not infect their human handlers. Bailey, who now directs a biocontainment lab at George Mason University in Virginia, said he was seeking to research the genetic differences between the Ebola found in the Reston monkeys and the strain currently circulating in West Africa. Though he acknowledged that the means of disease transmission among the animals would not guarantee the same result among humans, Bailey said the outcome may hold lessons for the present Ebola epidemic. "Those monkeys were dying in a pattern that was certainly suggestive of coughing and sneezing some sort of aerosol movement," Bailey said. "They were dying and spreading it so quickly from cage to cage. We finally came to the conclusion that the best action was to euthanize them all."
Some experts worry virus may spread more easily than assumed BETHESDA, Md. (TNS) U.S. officials leading the fight against history's worst outbreak of Ebola have said they know the ways the virus is spread and how to stop it. They say that unless an air traveler from disease ravaged West Africa has a fever of at least 101.5 degrees or other symptoms, co passengers are not at risk. "At this point there is zero risk of transmission on the flight," Dr. Thomas Frieden, director of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said after a Liberian man who flew through airports in Brussels and Washington was diagnosed with the disease last week in Dallas. Other public health officials have voiced similar assurances, saying Ebola is spread only through physical contact with a symptomatic individual or their bodily fluids. Yet some scientists who have long studied Ebola say such assurances are premature and they are concerned about what is not known about the strain now on the loose. Dr. C.J. Peters, who battled a 1989 outbreak of the virus among research monkeys housed in Virginia and who later led the CDC's most far reaching study of Ebola's transmissibility in humans, said he would not rule out the possibility that it spreads through the air in tight quarters. "We just don't have the data to exclude it," said Peters, who continues to research viral diseases at the University of Texas in Galveston. Three hospitalized in Spain for possible Ebola exposure (TNS) Questions were raised Tuesday about the quality of the protective equipment used by the medical team that cared for two Spanish priests who contracted Ebola as three more people were placed in quarantine for possible exposure to the virus. Spain's Health Ministry announced Monday that a nurse at the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid had tested positive for the virus, the first person known to have contracted Ebola outside Africa in the current epidemic. (TNS) In many cars, making a hands free phone call can be more distracting than picking up your phone, according to a new study from AAA and the University of Utah. In dash phone systems are overly complicated and prone to errors, the study found, and the same is true for voice activated functions for music and navigation. A companion study also found that trying to use Siri the voice control system on Apple phones while driving was dangerously distracting. Two participants in the study had virtual crashes in an automotive simulator while attempting to use Siri, the study's authors reported. (TNS) Colorado officially authorized same sex marriages Tuesday, joining the wave of states reacting to the U.S. Supreme Court's decision not to hear any pending appeals on gay marriage. The court's action effectively made gay marriage legal in states where about two thirds of the nation's people live. In addition to Colorado, 10 more states were working on the technicalities of allowing same sex marriage after the ruling. Ukraine Pro Russia separatists target key assets in east (TNS) Pro Russia separatists and Ukrainian government forces have abandoned all pretense of adhering to a cease fire agreed to a month ago as the rebels have stepped up their assault on the Donetsk airport in hopes of gaining control of eastern Ukraine's most important transport hub. A spokesman for the National Security and Defense Council reported Tuesday that five government soldiers had died in the fighting over the past 24 hours. Col. Andriy Lysenko told reporters in Kiev that the separatists had also suffered casualties in the escalating battle. (TNS) Officials in China have launched national disaster response teams after a strong earthquake hit the southwest of the country Tuesday night. The earthquake, which was at least 6.0 in magnitude according to preliminary data, was centered about 11 miles west of Weiyuan, China, in Yunnan province. The area borders Myanmar, Laos and northern Vietnam.
WHEELING Doctors at Wheeling Hospital are speaking about the spread of the Ebola virus. Doctors say it's far more difficult to catch the virus than what many had initially thought, and say the virus is something residents should be aware of, but not worry about. According to the CDC, symptoms for the disease are very general and are often the same symptoms shared by other illnesses such as the flu fever, severe headache, muscle pain, weakness, diarrhea, vomiting, and more. Officials suggest practicing good hygiene and also say getting a flu shot could be more beneficial for your health this season more so than in the past. "Ebola is very frightening, because of the potential for death, but it's difficult to get. You have to have direct contact with blood products of someone who has the disease, remember we don't generally get that, what we get is sneezing, coughing, spittle on us, which is most likely with influenza, so it's not easy to catch," said Dr. Clark Milton, Wheeling Hospital Corporate Health Medical Director. Right now, hospitals who are seeing patients with the Ebola virus are working quickly to isolate infected patients. Milton says the key take home message is to practice good health practices if you're sick and if you're not, avoid direct contact with others who are.
After the confirmation of the first diagnosed case of Ebola virus in the United States, the Kane County Health Department is coordinating its efforts with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Illinois Department of Public Health, area local health departments, hospitals and medical facilities to monitor for the Ebola virus. It is important to remember the Ebola virus does not spread easily and, though one individual has been diagnosed in the United States, there have been no reported cases of people becoming infected while here. The Ebola virus is spread by direct contact with blood or other body fluids of an infected person who has symptoms or with a person who has recently died from Ebola. It may also be spread through objects or surfaces contaminated by body fluids of a person infected with Ebola virus, for example clothing or bedding. Ebola is not spread through the air, by water or by food. The CDC recommends avoiding non essential travel to areas affected by the Ebola virus disease outbreak. You can protect yourself by the following these guidelines
There are no cases of Ebola in Tennessee right now none confirmed, none even suspected. But when the virus arrives, state health Commissioner Dr. John Dreyzehner said Tuesday afternoon, the medical community will "detect, protect and respond," just as it does with other contagious diseases. "We detect, protect and respond to diseases every day," Dreyzehner said. "We have the knowledge and the equipment." At this point, instead of battling the virus, the health department is battling misinformation, which can panic people, and stigma, which could cause people at risk from being dishonest about places they've traveled and people they've contacted, he said. What you need to know about Ebola Ebola isn't new, Dreyzehner said "We have almost 40 years of experience with this disease." Health practitioners are well versed in the procedures to deal with possible cases, including wearing protective gear gowns, goggles, masks, gloves. State and local health departments stand ready to answer questions on possible infected patients, he said. Knox County Health Department Director Dr. Martha Buchanan said local health officials already have been consulted a "handful" of times as people show up in local emergency rooms fearing they've been exposed to the virus. Some had traveled to countries that bordered or abutted countries where Ebola infection is prevalent, she said. So far no cases are even suspected no patients have needed to be quarantined or met the criteria to be monitored, Buchanan said. "We've educated people on what to watch for." Ebola is a reportable disease, so providers who have a suspected case are required to notify the health department. But "we want (hospitals to feel free) to call us" if there are any questions about the virus, said Buchanan, adding that some symptoms of Ebola are common to many other viruses and illnesses. Dreyzehner said Ebola is not airborne but transmitted only through bodily fluids blood, saliva, sweat, feces, semen. And people aren't infectious until after they show symptoms unlike other some viruses, such as influenza, which infected people can transmit up to 24 hours before they get sick. "That's a tremendous advantage," Dreyzehner said. Some scientists who have long studied Ebola question the certainty of that as the strain mutates, the Los Angeles Times reported Tuesday. But the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is adamant Ebola is transmitted only by direct contact with an ill person or his bodily fluids, with infection happening through broken skin or mucus membranes eyes, nose, mouth. "Wash your hands," Dreyzehner said. "Avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth. ... We touch our faces, on average, 16 times an hour," Dreyzehner said. "That's a significant route to (various) infections." Treatment for Ebola right now is "supportive," giving fluids and oxygen and keeping blood pressure and other infections under control so an infected patient's body has time to mount an immune response, he said. He said it's reasonable to think survival rates will be much higher in the United States, where supportive care is routinely available and an infected person's contacts can be more easily identified and tracked. "We do it every day" with other infectious diseases, Dreyzehner said.
This image from Liberia shows a poster warning people against the spread of the Ebola virus Image CDC Ebola is a virulent virus that has killed thousands during the latest outbreak and is notorious for its low survival rate among suffers of the full blown disease. Here we explain what it is. Ebola is a virus that can develop into a full blown disease known as Ebola haemorrhagic fever (Ebola HF) or Ebola viral disease (EVD), which in some patients leads to massive internal and external bleeding. Contrary to popular belief, it is not flesh eating, but destroys living tissue cells, which leads to the haemorrhaging, or bleeding. Up to 90 of people who contract the full blown disease die. It is not known why others survive. Ebola is transferred from person to person through contact with the blood or secretions of other bodily fluids of infected people. It can also be caught from infected animals or during burial ceremonies in which mourners come into contact with dead victims. Sufferers who are recovering after surviving the infection are known to have passed on the virus through sexual intercourse. Ebola often starts with a rapidly developing fever, intense weakness, muscle pain, headaches and a sore throat. This is followed by vomiting, diarrhoea, a rash, kidney and liver problems and bleeding. In some patients death can be very painful, as the disease destroys connective tissue and also attacks skin and internal organs. The time from infection through to appearance of symptoms is between two and 21 days. There is no vaccine for Ebola. Besides intensive supportive care to replace lost fluids (eg oral rehydration solution), the only medicine for the illness is ZMapp. The experimental drug has been credited with saving lives since it was tested on sufferers for the first time this year. However, it has not yet been subject to randomised clinical trials to establish its safety and whether it works. The disease was first identified in Zaire in 1976, in a part of Africa that is now part of the Democratic Republic of Congo. It is believed that fruit bats may be one of the hosts and is also known to be present in monkeys and apes. It is thought it may have made the leap from animal to human through the custom of consuming bush meat, which is common in some parts of Africa. It is classified as a level 4 biohazard, regarded as the most dangerous and requiring decontamination for those who work with it.
This story is part of the Deseret News National Edition, which focuses on the issues that resonate with American families. When the CDC brought home to America two individuals who contracted the Ebola virus while providing humanitarian care in Liberia, I had the same conversation several times in one day. "Why are we bringing Ebola to America?" It was a visceral reaction to a virus that most of us don't understand very well. Even the name feels scary. I suspect we have a hard time getting past the adjective that virtually every story I've seen on the topic uses to describe Ebola "deadly." I could think of a couple of reasons to bring them home, starting with the fact that it is home they are ours and we should help them if we can. Beyond that, though, is the simple fact that in an age of global travel, international borders won't keep a disease out. The recent case in Texas proves that. We have to know how to treat it. So a better plan is to bring stricken Americans home under the best circumstances possible these folks were brought in with extreme precautions to avoid spread and then treat the illness in the most effective way possible, fine tuning as we gain experience. The care team did both. Recently, Dr. Kent Brantly and aid worker Nancy Writebol were released from the hospital, cured and ready to go on with their lives. Their successful treatment and release tell the story of Ebola an admittedly frightening virus that has caused some to shed a bit of their humanity and common sense. Yes, Ebola can be deadly. But as viruses go, it's not very good at spreading. Unlike the common cold or influenza, it's not airborne. You can spread flu from about 6 feet away. In the middle of cold season, it seems there's no distance that virus can't cover. Ebola, on the other hand, requires direct contact with blood, sweat, saliva, urine, stool or vomit of someone who has active illness and symptoms. As a graphic put out by Vox notes, if you haven't touched one of those substances from someone who actively has the disease, "you do not have Ebola." Period. So if you're terrified of contracting Ebola, use good hygiene. Wash your hands frequently a good idea anyway, since a great variety of illnesses can be avoided that way. In The New Yorker, Atul Gawande, a writer, surgeon and public health researcher, wrote of cases where the disease spread was foiled by good hygiene. In one, nearly 20 years ago, a man was treated for 12 days before the virus was diagnosed. None of the 300 people caring for him got it. It's a matter of taking precautions to avoid contact with the secretions and disposing of them properly. The protocol for preventing an epidemic is not very complex. Find an Ebola patient's direct contacts, take their temperatures for 21 days and, should one show signs of an illness or fever, isolate that person. "Once you get anywhere upward of 70 percent of the contacts under surveillance, the disease stops spreading," Gawande wrote. "For patients who need to be isolated, the requirements are not terribly fancy. You need a room with a door that can close." That door is to keep people from unwittingly going in and touching the patient without taking proper precautions. You also need gloves and other coverings, but it need not be extreme. A more realistic worry with Ebola on American shores, as far as I can see, is that we'll figure out how to eradicate it, then when it's very, very close to annihilated, a segment of the population will decide to give it a comeback by not taking advantage of the tools available to them. That's been our history in recent memory with nearly gone and also potentially deadly illnesses like measles. Email lois deseretnews.com, Twitter Loisco
Over the past month, you may have heard people talking about the Ebola virus. You may have also seen something about it on television, in the newspaper or on the Internet. The reason for this is because an outbreak of Ebola started in West Africa in March. So far, the virus has infected nearly 6,000 people in Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal. The Ebola virus was discovered in two African countries (Sudan and Congo, then known as Zaire) in 1976. The affected region in Congo was near the Ebola River, which is how the virus got its name. Scientists believe the virus spread to humans who had contact with the blood or bodily fluids of infected animals, including bats, monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas, forest antelope and porcupines. There have been a number of Ebola outbreaks since 1976, but the current one is the largest. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta, Georgia, says the current outbreak could reach 1.4 million cases by early next year. Symptoms include a sudden onset of fever, muscle aches, weakness, sore throat and headache. These symptoms are followed by vomiting, diarrhea and a rash. As the infection progresses, many people develop bleeding in the internal organs and outside openings of their body. Ebola spreads from person to person, but it is not as contagious as the flu or cold viruses. Influenza and colds are spread through airborne contact. This means the virus can travel from one person to another through the air. It usually occurs from a sneeze. Ebola can be spread among humans only through direct contact with the blood or bodily fluids (saliva, mucus, etc.) of an infected person. This can occur by touching the infected person or by touching objects (such as needles) the person has been in contact with. A recent survey found that 1 in 4 Americans is worried that an outbreak of Ebola could happen in the United States. President Obama reassured the public at a recent news conference that the chances of this happening "are extremely low." The same thing has been said by CDC experts. Have any Americans been infected during this outbreak? Three Americans working in Liberia have been infected with Ebola since July. Two of them (one a doctor) were aid workers helping people who were infected with the virus. One of the Americans died, but the two aid workers were flown to the CDC for treatment. They both survived. An American doctor working in Sierra Leone also contracted the virus and is receiving treatment in Atlanta. To stop the spread of the disease, the World Health Organization and the CDC have been working with the governments of the affected countries to treat sick patients and contain the virus. (Ebola is more likely to spread in poor countries with limited access to clean water, proper sanitation and a well developed health care system.) Patients with Ebola are isolated from other people. Doctors and other aid workers wear protective clothing to keep them from coming in contact with the bodily fluids of infected people. In some countries, schools have been closed and air travel has been stopped to prevent anyone who might be in the early stages of the disease from spreading it to other countries. The most common reason American kids see the doctor is because they have a fever, runny nose or cough. The most common cause of these symptoms is a viral infection such as a cold. Antibiotics don't kill viruses, so kids are usually treated with fluids, rest and fever medicine. Fortunately, most of these infections are mild. Kids get better in three to seven days, when their immune system kills the virus. Ebola is scary for two reasons. First, as with most viruses, there are no medicines that can kill it. Infected people are treated with fever control, intravenous fluids to prevent dehydration and other measures. (The American aid workers who were flown back to the United States received an experimental drug to treat the infection.) Second, the way Ebola attacks the body makes it much harder for the immune system to kill the virus. Many people who get Ebola die from it. Although most kids don't like shots, the reason you get them is to keep you healthy. When you get a vaccination, your immune system makes antibodies (chemicals) to protect you from catching the disease if you come in contact with the germ at a later time. There is no vaccine to prevent Ebola at this time, but scientists are working hard to make one.
Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung has allowed the Ministry of Health to proactively use its standby fund created for countering epidemics in 2014 for preventive measures against Ebola epidemic, which has caused over 3,400 deaths in West Africa so far. The sum, worth 7.34 billion VND (345,000 USD), will be used to build up communications and technical materials, organise training, drill and quarantine activities, and purchase chemicals and protection gear. Earlier on September 27, the Hanoi Department of Health held an exercise to prepare medical staff for a possible Ebola outbreak in case the virus enters Vietnam. Meanwhile, a short training course on preventive measures and responses against Ebola virus was organised in the Central Highlands province of Dak Nong from September 22 27. Local authorities have built action plans to contain the disease in case of its outbreak while keeping a close watch on tourists and Vietnamese guest workers who have returned home from the Ebola hit areas. The Ministry of Transport has launched a plan against possible petechial fever caused by Ebola virus with a goal of early detecting infections in the sector, preventing the epidemic from spreading and minimising deaths. The Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism has also issued an action plan to prevent the virus, which poses a high risk of entering the country via tourists, and at the same time encouraged Vietnamese people to travel at home. The Ministry of Public Security affirmed that its clinics have prepared medicine, equipment, isolation areas and workforce in case of any Ebola outbreak. Ebola can cause fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, organ failure and internal and external bleeding. The earlier the virus is detected and the symptoms are treated, the higher the chance of survival is, according to the World Health Organisation. The current outbreak of Ebola, which is spread via contact with the bodily fluids of an infected person, such as sweat and blood, has taken the lives of 3,439 people out of 7,478 cases across five West African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal according to the latest WHO tally. No Ebola infections have been reported in Vietnam so far. VNA
The Ebola virus that erupted in West Africa this year has infected thousands of people in an epidemic that threatens to spin out of control. That epidemic was brought close to home this week, when the first U.S. Ebola case was diagnosed in Dallas, Texas. Could Ebola ravage the U.S. the way it has burned through Sierra Leone and Liberia? UConn Today turned to Dr. Kevin Dieckhaus for an answer. Dieckhaus is an infectious disease physician at UConn's Health Center. His specialties include antibiotic stewardship, HIV medicine, and infectious disease clinical care, but his passion is volunteering in Uganda, East Africa. UConn Today asked him to share his experience with infection control in both the U.S. and Africa, and explain why it's unlikely the virus will spread here. Q. Why is Ebola spreading so quickly through West Africa, and could that happen here? A. The main issues fueling Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever transmission in West Africa are limited resources and limited infrastructure to appropriately identify and isolate cases. Currently by the time a patient has presented for clinical care, that case has been able to transmit to other people. The big question in the U.S. is can it happen here? Someone from West Africa could appear in an emergency room somewhere in the U.S., but we have the ability to identify it relatively quickly. Should someone show up here with symptoms consistent with Ebola and an appropriate risk history, they would be placed in strict isolation, which should break the transmission cycle. There would also be extensive contact tracing to ensure that anyone they interacted with would be identified, in order to monitor their health and limit their ability to spread the virus. Q. How do we identify Ebola? A. It starts with case identification. If someone comes into the emergency room there are certain criteria we'd be looking for. Headache, fever, muscle pains, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, unexplained bleeding, or bruising. Those are fairly non specific, but when you add in historical factors such as recent travel to an Ebola endemic area or contact with someone from that area, especially if they have been working in a health care setting, interacting with family members who have been sick, or working with or preparing the dead bodies of those with Ebola our index of suspicion is much higher. If a patient is considered high risk, they would go into isolation for treatment. Health care workers would be wearing gowns, gloves, and masks for any patient interaction. Confirmatory testing would be sent to the CDC in Atlanta, but all precautions would be undertaken until the results are available. This is all well within our capabilities in a hospital setting in the U.S. Q. Can any hospital do that? Some American health care workers infected with Ebola have been transported to Atlanta. A. Several high biosafety clinical units are spread across the U.S. that the Centers for Disease Control helped fund. Atlanta is one. Those are probably the best equipped. But the reality is that it could be handled at any hospital in the U.S., because we have protocols in place for dealing with it. We do know how it's transmitted, it's not transmitted through the air. It's transmitted by direct contact. We know how to prevent that. If someone were to show up right now with Ebola, we would not be moving them to Atlanta. We would be taking care of them locally. Q. When you say Ebola is spread through contact, what do you mean? The other viruses we know of that spread through bodily fluids include HIV and Hepatitis C, which seem quite difficult to catch. A. Ebola is actually quite infectious, but only through direct contact. As opposed to HIV or Hepatitis C, which require parenteral, typically blood to blood, contact Ebola is present on human surfaces and in secretions, but only when the patient is ill. A person who is infected but not yet showing signs of the illness cannot transmit the virus. Someone who is acutely sick with Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever is making lots of virus, they're shedding lots of virus, and they may also be bleeding. And so simply touching someone is enough to transmit the virus to the new person. That's why contact precautions are so important. Q. When you say touching someone could it pass from, say, my skin to your skin? Would you need to put your hand in your mouth? A. If you were sick and I touched you, it would be pretty easy for me to catch the virus. Casual contact is enough. If a health care worker does not properly put on and remove gloves and other personal protective gear, there is the risk of contamination, and you could get it that way. Some of the lead doctors treating the epidemic in West Africa, who in theory took all of the appropriate precautions, have contracted the virus and died. The thought is that there may have been minor breaks to the isolation protocols, but in many cases it's not entirely known. That's why it's been so frightening in West Africa. Q. There's been some speculation in the press about Ebola becoming airborne. Have we ever had an example of a virus that required contact changing to an airborne form? A. Not that I'm aware of. In theory, if you're a fan of science fiction this would make a great novel. But it has not been proven to happen. Q. What are the most important scientific questions out there about Ebola now? A. For a clinician, the biggest question is therapy. There's a start up company with a product called Zmapp and another called TKM Ebola. These are antibodies against different epitopes the part of the virus the immune system sees and grabs onto of the Ebola virus. But these are experimental, and the companies don't have a lot of it to use in large outbreak settings. If antibodies work, the other possibility would be to use those from patients who have had Ebola and survived. Q. That's an old fashioned way of doing things, right? To make serums from people's blood? A. Yes, that's exactly what I'm talking about. It's a 1910 technology. Basically you take the gamma globulin from someone who has recovered, their antibodies, and infuse it into the next person who is sick. The companies only have so much antibody to give out, but there are lots of patients who have recovered from Ebola. Q. What have we learned from previous epidemics that we can apply here? A. Identification and prevention are key! This is a virus for which therapy is not really that effective, nor readily available. Hospitals in the U.S. are prepared for Ebola. We know what to look for, we're prepared, and know what to do when and if it happens. The average hospital in the U.S. can manage Ebola if it happens to show up on our doorstep.
Survivors of the Ebola outbreak attend a discharging ceremony at a health clinic in Freetown October 6, 2014. Sierra Leone recorded 121 deaths from Ebola and scores of new infections in one of the single deadliest days since the disease appeared in the West African country more than four months ago, government health statistics showed on Sunday.REUTERS Umaru Fofana Researchers have synthesised a molecule that mimics a functionally critical region of the virus found in all strains of Ebola. This molecule can be a useful drug target in producing anti Ebola agents. The molecule, called peptide mimic, displays a highly conserved region in the Ebola protein that controls entry of the virus into the human host cell, initiating infection. The target is suitable for use in high throughput drug screens allowing for quick identification of potential drugs, according to the University of Utah biochemists. "The current growing epidemic demonstrates the need for effective broad range Ebola virus therapies," says Dr Tracy R Clinton, lead author on the study. "Importantly, viral sequence information from the epidemic reveals rapid changes in the viral genome, while our target sequence remains the same. Therefore, our target will enable the discovery of drugs with the potential to treat any future epidemic, even if new Ebola virus strains emerge." Five strains of the virus have led to many outbreaks in recent years. The need for an anti Ebola agent that protects against such natural outbreaks and bio terror attacks is urgent. The target was shown to be suitable for the discovery of drug candidates that are much simpler and less expensive to produce compared to the antibodies approach. Experimental drugs from ZMapp and TKM Ebola have been used on American patients who have recovered. However, it is not still confirmed if their recovery was due to the drugs, which also come with side effects. A new antiviral Brincidofovir has been favoured for use on the Liberian detected with Ebola in the US. Brincidofovir, or CMX 001 has been tested on 1000 patients safely and found to have no side effects in terms of fluid loss leading to electrolyte imbalances that affect the heart and kidneys, says Fox News. Meanwhile, the bogey of racism has been raised again with questions thrown on why Thomas Eric Duncan, the Liberian admitted to a Texas hospital received the experimental medicine nearly a week after being admitted into the hospital. "It's a general rule in medicine that the earlier you start therapy in a sick person who needs the therapy, the better the response," Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute for Allergies and Infectious Diseases, told CNN when asked about the impact of the wait for the drug. RelatedEbola WHO Experts Suggest Tapping Blood Of Survivors As Potential TreatmentEbola Outbreak Hope As Ebola Drug ZMapp Proves 100 Effective in MonkeysEbola Cure US Eases Restrictions On Drug TestingEbola US Refuses Nigeria's Request for ZMapp DrugEbola and ZMapp What is the 'Secret Serum' That 'Cured' American Doctor Kent Brantly?
Researchers have recently developed a new drug target in the Ebola virus that could be used against it to fight the disease. University of Utah biochemists have produced a molecule, known as a peptide mimic that displays a functionally critical region of the virus that is universally conserved in all known species of Ebola. This new tool could be used as a drug target in the discovery of anti Ebola agents that are effective against all known strains and likely future strains. The scientists designed peptide mimics of a highly conserved region in the Ebola protein that controls entry of the virus into the human host cell, initiating infection. They were able to demonstrate this peptide target was suitable for use in high throughput drug screens. These kinds of screens allow rapid identification of potential new drugs from billions of possible candidates.
Ebola survivors in West Africa have been advised to use condoms in a bid to prevent the disease from spreading. Peter Piot, one of the discoverers of the deadly virus in 1976, has said survivors should not have unprotected sex for at least 90 days after it was discovered the virus could remain present. The World Health Organisation is hoping to announce later this week that Nigeria and Senegal are free of Ebola after 42 days with no infections. The maximum incubation period of the virus is 21 days, however it appears the disease can last in semen for much longer. In an information note on Monday the WHO said "In a convalescent male, the virus can persist in semen for at least 70 days one study suggests persistence for more than 90 days." Mr Piot, a professor at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, said "Certainly, the advice has to be for survivors to use a condom, to not have unprotected sex, for 90 days." "If we would apply the rule for double the time, that would be 180 days six months. I think it (90 days) is probably a compromise, for practicality," he told a news conference in Geneva. Ebola spreads via bodily fluids such as blood and saliva, but it has also been detected in breast milk and urine, as well as semen, the WHO has said. The whole live virus has never been isolated from sweat, however. More than 3,400 people are already known to have died in West Africa the world's worst Ebola outbreak on record. It was reported today that the bodies of Ebola victims have been left in the streets of Sierra Leone following a strike by burial teams who say they have not been paid. Health Ministry spokesman Sidie Yahya Tunis has said the situation was "very embarrassing", insisting money is available to pay the teams. The WHO says Ebola is believed to have killed more than 600 people in Sierra Leone, where there have been more than 2,100 confirmed cases.
Northern Ireland's Public Health Agency is preparing to tackle Ebola, should the deadly virus reach the province. A Spanish nurse has become the first person known to have contracted the virus outside Africa and the World Health Organisation has warned that its spread across Europe is "quite unavoidable". The Public Health Agency says the risk to the public in Northern Ireland is very low, but it is working to ensure we are prepared. "There is a potential risk for volunteers and healthcare staff working in affected countries, especially if involved in caring for Ebola patients," said Dr Lorraine Doherty, Assistant Director of Public Health. "However, if the basic precautions that would apply in all humanitarian situations are applied and the general principles of infection control are adhered to, the risk can be minimised." She said anyone who has travelled and stayed in the areas where Ebola cases have been recently reported, and becomes ill within 21 days of returning home the symptoms being fever, headache, achiness, sore throat, diarrhoea, vomiting, stomach pain, rash, or red eyes should seek medical attention as soon as possible. The likelihood of an individual contracting Ebola is extremely low unless they have been exposed directly to blood or body fluids of symptomatic people or animals, or infected objects. It is not an airborne illness. Dr Doherty said "As part of contingency preparations, the PHA has provided primary care and hospital healthcare workers with the latest information about the outbreak and actions to take in the event of a possible case. "It is important to remember that for Ebola to be transmitted from one person to another contact with blood or other body fluids are needed. As such, if Northern Ireland was to see a case of Ebola this will not result in an outbreak here. "The PHA is working with partner HSC organisations to ensure we have appropriate systems in place in the unlikely event that a case presents in Northern Ireland. "The overall risk of Ebola in Northern Ireland remains low." The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that the affected countries should conduct exit screening for individuals with unexplained illness consistent with potential Ebola infection. WHO also recommends that Ebola cases or contacts should not undertake international travel, unless the travel is part of an appropriate medical evacuation. However, entry screening in the UK is not recommended by WHO. There are no plans to introduce entry screening for Ebola in the UK. Background The Ebola virus causes an acute, serious illness which is often fatal if untreated. Ebola virus disease (EVD) first appeared in 1976 in 2 simultaneous outbreaks, one in Nzara, Sudan, and the other in Yambuku, Democratic Republic of Congo. The latter occurred in a village near the Ebola River, from which the disease takes its name. The current outbreak in west Africa, (first cases notified in March 2014), is the largest and most complex Ebola outbreak since the Ebola virus was first discovered in 1976. There have been more cases and deaths in this outbreak than all others combined. It has also spread between countries starting in Guinea then spreading across land borders to Sierra Leone and Liberia, by air (1 traveller only) to Nigeria, and by land (1 traveller) to Senegal. The most severely affected countries, Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia have very weak health systems, lacking human and infrastructural resources, having only recently emerged from long periods of conflict and instability. On August 8, the WHO Director General declared this outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. A separate, unrelated Ebola outbreak began in Boende, Equateur, an isolated part of the Democratic Republic of Congo. The virus family Filoviridae includes 3 genera Cuevavirus, Marburgvirus, and Ebolavirus. There are 5 species that have been identified Zaire, Bundibugyo, Sudan, Reston and Ta Forest. The first 3, Bundibugyo ebolavirus, Zaire ebolavirus, and Sudan ebolavirus have been associated with large outbreaks in Africa. The virus causing the 2014 west African outbreak belongs to the Zaire species. Transmission It is thought that fruit bats of the Pteropodidae family are natural Ebola virus hosts. Ebola is introduced into the human population through close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected animals such as chimpanzees, gorillas, fruit bats, monkeys, forest antelope and porcupines found ill or dead or in the rainforest. Ebola then spreads through human to human transmission via direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials (e.g. bedding, clothing) contaminated with these fluids. Health care workers have frequently been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed EVD. This has occurred through close contact with patients when infection control precautions are not strictly practiced. Burial ceremonies in which mourners have direct contact with the body of the deceased person can also play a role in the transmission of Ebola. People remain infectious as long as their blood and body fluids, including semen and breast milk, contain the virus. Men who have recovered from the disease can still transmit the virus through their semen for up to 7 weeks after recovery from illness. Symptoms of Ebola virus disease The incubation period, that is, the time interval from infection with the virus to onset of symptoms is 2 to 21 days. Humans are not infectious until they develop symptoms. First symptoms are the sudden onset of fever fatigue, muscle pain, headache and sore throat. This is followed by vomiting, diarrhoea, rash, symptoms of impaired kidney and liver function, and in some cases, both internal and external bleeding (e.g. oozing from the gums, blood in the stools). Laboratory findings include low white blood cell and platelet counts and elevated liver enzymes. Diagnosis It can be difficult to distinguish EVD from other infectious diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever and meningitis. Confirmation that symptoms are caused by Ebola virus infection are made using the following investigations antibody capture enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT PCR) assay Samples from patients are an extreme biohazard risk laboratory testing on non inactivated samples should be conducted under maximum biological containment conditions. Treatment and vaccines Supportive care rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids and treatment of specific symptoms, improves survival. There is as yet no proven treatment available for EVD. However, a range of potential treatments including blood products, immune therapies and drug therapies are currently being evaluated. No licensed vaccines are available yet, but 2 potential vaccines are undergoing human safety testing. Prevention and control Good outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, namely case management, surveillance and contact tracing, a good laboratory service, safe burials and social mobilisation. Community engagement is key to successfully controlling outbreaks. Raising awareness of risk factors for Ebola infection and protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission. Risk reduction messaging should focus on several factors Reducing the risk of wildlife to human transmission from contact with infected fruit bats or monkeys apes and the consumption of their raw meat. Animals should be handled with gloves and other appropriate protective clothing. Animal products (blood and meat) should be thoroughly cooked before consumption. Reducing the risk of human to human transmission from direct or close contact with people with Ebola symptoms, particularly with their bodily fluids. Gloves and appropriate personal protective equipment should be worn when taking care of ill patients at home. Regular hand washing is required after visiting patients in hospital, as well as after taking care of patients at home. Outbreak containment measures including prompt and safe burial of the dead, identifying people who may have been in contact with someone infected with Ebola, monitoring the health of contacts for 21 days, the importance of separating the healthy from the sick to prevent further spread, the importance of good hygiene and maintaining a clean environment. Controlling infection in health care settings Health care workers should always take standard precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. These include basic hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, use of personal protective equipment (to block splashes or other contact with infected materials), safe injection practices and safe burial practices. Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Ebola virus should apply extra infection control measures to prevent contact with the patient's blood and body fluids and contaminated surfaces or materials such as clothing and bedding. When in close contact (within 1 metre) of patients with EBV, health care workers should wear face protection (a face shield or a medical mask and goggles), a clean, non sterile long sleeved gown, and gloves (sterile gloves for some procedures). Laboratory workers are also at risk. Samples taken from humans and animals for investigation of Ebola infection should be handled by trained staff and processed in suitably equipped laboratories. WHO response WHO aims to prevent Ebola outbreaks by maintaining surveillance for Ebola virus disease and supporting at risk countries to developed preparedness plans. The document provides overall guidance for control of Ebola and Marburg virus outbreaks Ebola and Marburg virus disease epidemics preparedness, alert, control, and evaluation When an outbreak is detected WHO responds by supporting surveillance, community engagement, case management, laboratory services, contact tracing, infection control, logistical support and training and assistance with safe burial practices. The story of dead Ebola victims rising from the dead, with the first "picture" of one of the zombies that has gone viral, (if it weren't glaringly obvious) is a hoax. The story, "Africa confirms 3rd Ebola victim rises from the dead, releases picture of first 'Ebola zombie' captured," was shared which has been shared around the web, is posted on a satirical site. The image caption reads "For the first time in human history, confirmed footage is captured of a man who scientists watched die from Ebola then only several hours later, regain life and rise from the dead". A lab Zombie seen in 'World War Z' The site, Big America News, purports to be built upon the principles of "fearless reporting, loudly yelled opinions and facts proudly born of raw gut instinct". The image on the article, while impressive, is in fact doctored picture of a zombie from the film World War Z. It appears to have taken an image of one of the film's lab zombies, and merged it with this picture of a "realistic movie sculpture" from Schell Studios, which the messageboard 8chan pointed out. It is just the latest in a series of rumours of Ebola victims being seen "resurrecting" after apparently being killed by the virus. Reports of two separate cases of Ebola victims dying and then coming back to life in Liberia's Nimba County have appeared in two African news outlets All Africa and The New Dawn. The reports suggest the women identified as Doris Qui of Hope Village Community, and Ma Kebeh, "resurrected" as they were about to be taken to burial. However, as hoax debunking site Snopes.com points out "No corroborating report of Ebola resurrections have surfaced since the initial story was published in Liberia, and no details have emerged to clarify the circumstances under which the patients died." Another story that hasn't helped the resurrection rumours is from when Good Morning America's Dr Besser and his team captured a man thought to have died from the virus seen moving on film. The man was filmed being prepared for burial when he was seen twitching his arm on the camera. In this case, it is understood that the man being filmed was mistakenly thought to be dead, but the advanced levels of his condition explain how the mistake, while shocking for viewers, could have been made. Dr Besser says in the report "It doesn't look to me like he is going to make it, there are very few signs of life." Further reading Test for Ebola at UK airports Home office minister Strike leaves Ebola dead in streets Ebola will spread across Europe, warns WHO chief Zsuzsanna Jakab Cobra meeting to discuss Ebola
The Ebola virus first appeared in 1976 in two simultaneous outbreaks in Nzara, Sudan and in Yambuku, Democratic Republic of Congo. The current outbreak has killed more than 3,500 people. So, what are the symptoms and treatment? The Congo outbreak occurred in a village near the Ebola River, from which the disease takes its name. The current outbreak in west Africa is the largest and most complex Ebola outbreak since the virus was first discovered. There have been more cases and deaths in this outbreak than all others combined. It has also spread between countries starting in Guinea then spreading across land borders to Sierra Leone and Liberia, by air to Nigeria, and by land to Senegal. A separate, unrelated Ebola outbreak began in Boende, Equateur, an isolated part of the Democratic Republic of Congo. Previous outbreaks have had mortality rates as high as 90 per cent, though the chance of dying from the most recent strand appears to be at around 60 per cent. Transmission It is thought that fruit bats of the Pteropodidae family are natural Ebola virus hosts. Ebola is introduced into the human population through close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected animals such as chimpanzees, gorillas, fruit bats, monkeys, forest antelope and porcupines found ill or dead or in the rainforest. Ebola then spreads through human to human transmission via direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials (e.g. bedding, clothing) contaminated with these fluids. Health care workers have frequently been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed EVD. This has occurred through close contact with patients when infection control precautions are not strictly practiced. Burial ceremonies in which mourners have direct contact with the body of the deceased person can also play a role in the transmission of Ebola. People remain infectious as long as their blood and body fluids, including semen and breast milk, contain the virus. Men who have recovered from the disease can still transmit the virus through their semen for up to 7 weeks after recovery from illness. Symptoms of Ebola virus disease The incubation period, that is, the time interval from infection with the virus to onset of symptoms is 2 to 21 days. Humans are not infectious until they develop symptoms. First symptoms are the sudden onset of fever fatigue, muscle pain, headache and sore throat. This is followed by vomiting, diarrhoea, rash, symptoms of impaired kidney and liver function, and in some cases, both internal and external bleeding (e.g. oozing from the gums, blood in the stools). Laboratory findings include low white blood cell and platelet counts and elevated liver enzymes. Diagnosis It can be difficult to distinguish EVD from other infectious diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever and meningitis. Confirmation that symptoms are caused by Ebola virus infection are made using the following investigations antibody capture enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT PCR) assay Samples from patients are an extreme biohazard risk laboratory testing on non inactivated samples should be conducted under maximum biological containment conditions. Treatment and vaccines Supportive care rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids and treatment of specific symptoms, improves survival. There is as yet no proven treatment available for EVD. However, a range of potential treatments including blood products, immune therapies and drug therapies are currently being evaluated. No licensed vaccines are available yet, but 2 potential vaccines are undergoing human safety testing. Prevention and control Good outbreak control relies on applying a package of interventions, namely case management, surveillance and contact tracing, a good laboratory service, safe burials and social mobilisation. Community engagement is key to successfully controlling outbreaks. Raising awareness of risk factors for Ebola infection and protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission. Risk reduction messaging should focus on several factors Reducing the risk of wildlife to human transmission from contact with infected fruit bats or monkeys apes and the consumption of their raw meat. Animals should be handled with gloves and other appropriate protective clothing. Animal products (blood and meat) should be thoroughly cooked before consumption. Reducing the risk of human to human transmission from direct or close contact with people with Ebola symptoms, particularly with their bodily fluids. Gloves and appropriate personal protective equipment should be worn when taking care of ill patients at home. Regular hand washing is required after visiting patients in hospital, as well as after taking care of patients at home. Outbreak containment measures including prompt and safe burial of the dead, identifying people who may have been in contact with someone infected with Ebola, monitoring the health of contacts for 21 days, the importance of separating the healthy from the sick to prevent further spread, the importance of good hygiene and maintaining a clean environment. Controlling infection in health care settings Health care workers should always take standard precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. These include basic hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, use of personal protective equipment (to block splashes or other contact with infected materials), safe injection practices and safe burial practices. Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Ebola virus should apply extra infection control measures to prevent contact with the patient's blood and body fluids and contaminated surfaces or materials such as clothing and bedding. When in close contact (within 1 metre) of patients with EBV, health care workers should wear face protection (a face shield or a medical mask and goggles), a clean, non sterile long sleeved gown, and gloves (sterile gloves for some procedures). Further reading Ebola virus warning for the UK Health officials issue warning to doctors as outbreak fears grow
News outlets report on the public's skepticism over the transmission of Ebola virus. Both the CDC and WHO have issued statements clarifying how the virus does and does not spread, saying the virus is unlikely to become airborne. Financial Times Experts reject fears Ebola could become airborne "Virologists rejected suggestions on Tuesday that Ebola might mutate to become an airborne virus after a Spanish nurse became the person to contract the virus outside of West Africa. The Ebola virus is transmitted between people only through physical contact with infected body fluids, particularly blood, feces, and vomit..." (Cookson, 10 7). The Hill CDC Airborne Ebola possible but unlikely "The Ebola virus becoming airborne is a possible but unlikely outcome in the current epidemic, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Director Tom Frieden said Tuesday. The outbreak involves Ebola Zaire, a strain that is passed through bodily fluids, not the air. But some experts have expressed fear about viral mutations due to the unprecedented and rising number of Ebola cases. Frieden sought to allay those fears during a call with reporters..." (Viebeck, 10 7). Los Angeles Times Some Ebola experts worry virus may spread more easily than assumed "U.S. officials leading the fight against history's worst outbreak of Ebola have said they know the ways the virus is spread and how to stop it. They say that unless an air traveler from disease ravaged West Africa has a fever of at least 101.5 degrees or other symptoms, co passengers are not at risk. ... Yet some scientists who have long studied Ebola say such assurances are premature and they are concerned about what is not known about the strain now on the loose..." (Willman, 10 7). USA Today WHO Ebola doesn't spread through the air like a cold "With some Americans on edge over the news of the country's first Ebola patient, the World Health Organization issued a statement Monday clarifying how the virus does and doesn't spread. ... Many people are worried that they can catch Ebola because someone coughs on them. While this is a common way to catch the flu, it's not a major concern for Ebola, the WHO says..." (Szabo, 10 6).
Dr Ben Neuman, a virologist at the university, says while there are people who have Ebola there will be some risk to the UK but experience and protective equipment are the keys to treating the deadly virus. The experience of successfully treating British nurse William Pooley, is helping the country stay safe from the deadly Ebola virus according to a Reading University expert. Dr Ben Neuman, a virologist at the university, says while there are people who have Ebola there will be some risk to the UK but experience and protective equipment are the keys to treating the deadly virus. He said "Britain has the facilities to treat a small number of Ebola patients safely, and the experience of successfully treating the first infected British nurse without further spread is invaluable experience. "Ebola is caught through bodily fluids sufferers often lose a lot of fluid through diarrhoea and vomiting, and both would contain large amounts of virus. "In hospitals, it is often nurses who have to clean up those fluids other than handling an Ebola corpse, cleaning up fluids is probably the most dangerous aspect of caring for an Ebola patient." Dr Neuman said Ebola lives in the bloodstream and is unlikely to spread easily from someone sitting next to you. He added "The way it is transmitted is much closer to HIV than to a common cold. "Ebola is a fragile virus that can be inactivated with simple disinfectants like soap or dilute bleach. In a place like the UK, where the power stays on and you are never far from a working tap if you want to wash your hands, it is much easier to contain the virus than it is in West Africa. Infrastructure is our best protection." Public Health England says the UK is not screening people coming to the country and the risk of the virus coming here remains low. The Royal Berkshire Hospital has robust plans in place should anyone be brought in suspected of having the virus. They would use a special entrance, be kept in isolation and staff in protective clothing would test them. If they were diagnosed to have Ebola they would be taken to the Royal Free Hospital in London for treatment. No treatment would be given at the Royal Berks. South Central Ambulance Service NHS Foundation Trust (SCAS) has plans, protocols and procedures in place for the handling of all infectious patients and would respond to Ebola patients with those measures. Spokeswoman Michelle Archer said "We have been working in partnership with national health agencies and as such have received a national algorithm and guidance on caring for a potential Ebola patient. "This is similar to the way in which we respond to that of other infectious diseases illnesses. Staff have been well briefed on the treatment of such patients and our staff are well prepared to deal with this situation should it arise."
The Ebola virus has caused panic in some parts of the world that an epidemic could be just round the corner. Already almost 3,500 have perished, mainly in West Africa, while a cure for the disease seems nowhere in sight. This has not stopped numerous doctors, quacks, faith healers and even entrepreneurs from peddling their own cures to one of the deadliest viruses since the turn of the millennium. RT has delved into some of the strangest proposed remedies to stop the epidemic in West Africa and beyond, including... bathing in saltwater at midnight. Growing up as a child, parents would often speak of the necessity to drink orange juice or eat berries to boost one's immune system by adding more Vitamin C. However, some scientists are now touting that this vitamin could also prove to be a cure for Ebola. Thomas E. Levy, who is a board certified internist and cardiologist, as well as been a bar qualified law practitioner, believes that Vitamin C can break down the Ebola virus due to its chemical structure. He believes a reaction can be created inside the virus, which will be enhanced by the presence of Vitamin C and this reaction can end up destroying whatever is in its immediate environment. Took my 6th vitamin c tablet of the day just now.. I swear this Ebola stuff has me freaking out Sydney ( sydneyrosss) October 1, 2014 Dr Giffird Jones is another physician who is willing to talk up the benefits of Vitamin C, saying that it is the glue that holds cells together. He looks at the similarities between scurvy and the Ebola virus and tries to draw the conclusion that the two are related, due to a lack of Vitamin C. "What is appalling is that researchers and doctors should know that vitamin C has cured viral diseases like Yellow Fever, Crimean Congo Hemorrhagic Fever Dengue Fever and other viral diseases. But no expert has mentioned the possibility of using large doses of Vitamin C to cure the Ebola infection," Dr. Jones told the Windsor Star. However, the craze seems not have caught on just yet, and surprisingly Vitamin C has not become the cure to all the world's illnesses. There is no shortage of oranges or other fruit containing Vitamin C. Rather, credible scientists and those with enough common sense have dismissed this harebrained scheme for what it is. The seeds of a tree from West Africa were also championed as a cure for the Ebola virus. For centuries parts of the Garcinia kola tree have been used in local medicines to help cure colds and fevers and there was hope it could even tackle Ebola. Maurice Iwu, the executive director of the Bio resources Development and Conservation Program, based in Maryland, believed that part of the seeds could be used to help stop the virus from spreading. This led to Nigerians carrying it around with them, since the latest outbreak of the virus, believing that it would give them a better chance of not contracting Ebola. His research was published in 1999, but it was only at a very early stage and there was no further testing on animals or humans to see if could actually work. This prompted Nigeria's Health Minister, Onyebuchi Chukwu, to go on the record and refute the claims that compounds from "Bitter Kola" were a miracle cure. "As I speak to you now, there is no proof yet of any such fruit. I repeat, there is no proof yet of any fruit," he said, according to the Vanguard news website. Traditional Chinese medicines have been around for thousands of years, and have been claimed to have combated previous epidemics such as the Bubonic Plague. However, the founder of alternative medicine website Natural News, Mike Adams, says he thinks that herbs have the necessary known antiviral properties, which could prove effective against Ebola, "especially when the world of drugs and pharmaceuticals currently has nothing to offer whatsoever." ITG ebolahttp t.co gbFMdyBBh5 Astragalus is categorized as one of the immune system herbs, and has been in ... pic.twitter.com BnqRUS0zlP MSGU BOT ( MSGUBOT) August 8, 2014 Similar to those supporting Vitamin C as a cure, Adams believes that supporting one's immune system is a good bet to fight the Ebola virus. He gives excellent advice, such as quitting smoking and getting enough sleep in trying to combat the virus. However, if one is misfortunate enough to catch it, then the best advice is to stay fully hydrated, boost your vitamin D blood levels, get plenty of rest and don't stress yourself. Various companies selling beauty oils are trying to cash in on the hysteria surrounding Ebola. According to Science Based Medicine website, the makers of Terra oils, the company's website stated "The reason doctors can't do anything for viruses is because viruses live inside of your cell's walls, and medicine particles can't penetrate those walls. Essential oils, however, have super tiny particles and a makeup that allows them to pass through with no problem! They go in, kill the virus while also stopping the viral cells from duplicating, and all the while boost the immune system so the body can continue to fight for itself. We've found that we can kill viral infections in 12 48 hours, depending on how quickly we start using oils." Unfortunately a cure for the Ebola virus has not been found and far from it. The US Food and Drug Administration recently warned three companies about selling oil remedies, after a series of complaints from unsatisfied customers. "We noticed that when there is a public health issue that really comes to the fore for example H1N1 a few years ago, and now Ebola there tends to be an increase in health fraud products, which are products that claim to prevent, treat or cure disease and the product has not been approved by FDA," the agency stated. BEWARE These do NOT prevent or cure Ebola colloidal silver, garcinia kola nut, vitamin C, cinnamon oil, thieves oil pic.twitter.com uJvyVhxMBD Ebola Alert ( EbolaAlert) October 4, 2014 Nigeria is not far from the epicenter of the Ebola virus and its citizens are certainly getting worried. Many are turning to saltwater baths as a last resort, after being recommended to by the ruler of the Igala Kingdom, Idakwo Michael Ameh Oboni II, who said that the salt solution would provide an effective remedy. He is believed by many in the region to have mystical powers, which he inherited from his father. To fortify yourself completely against ebola virus ,add this salt to your bathing and drinking water pic.twitter.com VEuLayAkxk PROJET EYE ON D MOON ( iTweet Sugar) August 12, 2014 The rumors went viral (on the Internet, not the disease), according to the Premium Times, an online newspaper based in Nigeria's capital, Abuja. However, these baths could not be undertaken just at any old time of the day, they had to be carried out between midnight and before four in the morning. "Ebola has finally entered Maiduguri! To prevent Ebola sickness use hot water to bathe before 4 am. Ebola is real!" a text message read, which sent residents into a frenzy, searching for any source of saltwater they could find, the publication reported. Aside from bathing in salt water, other options included drinking some saltwater before bathing, as well as reciting some verses from the Koran.
When the only way to get an often fatal disease is through contact with body fluids, it makes good sense to be very careful about sexual partners and practices. But since Ebola victims can infect others only when they are showing symptoms high fever, vomiting, diarrhea, weakness and aches physical intimacy probably isn't a common way of transmitting the disease. However, the Ebola virus can survive in semen for months after a man recovers from the infection, posing an ongoing threat to sexual partners long after he is well. At a time when a man's bloodstream is swimming with antibodies, and he is immune to the disease, he still may be able to infect others. Post Exclusive How Ebola outpaced a slow global response As a result, Ebola survivors in West Africa and elsewhere are being advised to remain celibate or use condoms for three months after their release from treatment centers. In Lofa County, Liberia, where the epidemic began six months ago, UNICEF workers doing outreach work were told the story of one local man who recovered and infected his girlfriend through sex, according to a UNICEF official. The woman later died. (We couldn't independently verify that account). The World Health Organization made a point of this on Monday when it noted that "in a convalescent male, the virus can persist in semen for at least 70 days one study suggests persistence for more than 90 days." The magnitude of the threat is not entirely clear, however. After past Ebola outbreaks, follow up studies of people who have recovered from Ebola found no evidence that the virus was transmitted from a recovered patient to close contacts, according to Bruce Ribner, medical director of Emory University's Infectious Disease Unit, who led the team that successfully treated American missionaries Kent Brantly and Nancy Writebol. Some body fluids and excretions clearly transmit the virus Blood, vomit and feces are being blamed for the rapid spread of the hemorrhagic disease in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, where more than 3,400 people have died from Ebola infection. The Ebola virus also has been detected in urine and breast milk, according to the WHO. Other fluids are trickier. Ebola is not an airborne virus, like SARS or the flu, but "theoretically," the WHO notes, "wet and bigger droplets from a heavily infected individual, who has respiratory symptoms caused by other conditions or who vomits violently, could transmit the virus over a short distance to another nearby person. "This could happen when virus laden heavy droplets are directly propelled, by coughing or sneezing (which does not mean airborne transmission) onto the mucus membranes or skin with cuts or abrasions of another person." But the agency adds that there are no studies that document this method of transmission. Saliva and tears may also carry the virus, but studies blaming them for transmission had small samples and were inconclusive. "In studies of saliva, the virus was found most frequently in patients at a severe stage of illness," the WHO said. "The whole live virus has never been isolated from sweat," the agency added, but one infectious disease specialist we spoke with said it stands to reason that Ebola could be transmitted by direct contact with someone else's perspiration. CDC Director on Ebola "That's when I stopped sleeping" Dallas Ebola patient rues bringing virus to 'love of my life'
Survivors of Ebola often face stigma and fear from community members who worry they might spread the disease after leaving the hospital. These fears are almost entirely misplaced. Once someone has recovered from the virus, they cannot infect others through handshakes, hugs, or kisses. Their sweat isn't contagious. Even the vomit, urine, and feces of the disease's survivors has been shown to be Ebola free. For instance, a 1977 study of an outbreak in what is now the Democratic Republic of Congo found Ebola in the semen of one survivor 61 days after the onset of his disease. And a 1999 study found the virus in an Ebola survivor's semen 82 days after he first became ill. That study recommended that survivors use condoms for "at least" three months after contracting the disease. A separate 1999 study, backed by the Centers for Disease Control, identified one woman who tested positive for Ebola but never developed symptoms. The researchers concluded that it was unclear if she ever actually contracted the virus, but that it was "possible" that she was infected by a recovered Ebola patient via his semen. In a statement issued Monday, the World Health Organization echoed these findings, warning that Ebola "can persist in survivors' semen for at least 70 days" and that some research even "suggests persistence for more than 90 days." The sample sizes for these studies are extremely small, and it's unclear just how great a risk the semen of surviving men poses in the weeks following their illness. Still, officials from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have recommended that they use condoms. And Doctors Without Borders which has been on the front lines of the current outbreak since its early stages is distributing condoms to survivors, according to a spokesperson for the group. Speaking at a United Nations office in Liberia earlier this month, an epidemiologist and WHO consultant from Uganda a nation that saw its own Ebola outbreak as recently as 2013 said that sexual transmission could make the disease harder to contain. He criticized public health officials for not doing enough to encourage the use of condoms. And Semen may not be the only bodily fluid through which a patient recovering from Ebola could pass on the disease. In 2000, researchers tested the fluids of a female Ebola survivor whose blood was already clear of the virus. Fifteen days after first falling ill, Ebola was still found in the woman's breast milk. Her child eventually died of Ebola, though the researchers could not be certain the child got sick from feeding. "At any rate," wrote the researchers, "it seems prudent to advise breastfeeding mothers who survive Ebola to avoid breastfeeding for at least some weeks after recovery."
Some of the ultrastructural morphology displayed by an Ebola virus virion is revealed in this undated handout colorized transmission electron micrograph (TEM) obtained by Reuters August 1, 2014. The 2014 Ebola outbreak is the worst since the disease was discovered in the mid 1970s. REUTERS Cynthia Goldsmith CDC Handout via ReutersReuters The 2014 Ebola epidemic in West Africa is the largest in history and has killed more than 3,400 people. Despite assurances from public health officials that it is not an airborne disease, fears are mounting as experts on the ground warn the outbreak is "out of control" and as imported cases hit Europe and the US. What is Ebola? Ebola, previously known as Ebola hemorrhagic fever, is a rare and deadly disease, which has various strains the Ebola Zaire is known as the most dangerous. Volunteers carry an Ebola victim for burial in Waterloo, around 30 kilometers southeast of Freetown, Sierra Leone(Getty) The virus was first discovered in 1976 from outbreaks in southern Sudan and in northern Zaire, now known as Democratic Republic of the Congo. It was named "Ebola" after a small river in north western DRC. The third African strain, named C te d'Ivoire Ebola, was discovered in 1994. According to the US National Library of Medicine, it was isolated from an infected ethnologist who had worked in the Tai Forest reserve and had done a necropsy (post mortem examination) on a chimpanzee. The fourth strain is known as the Bundibugyo Ebola virus. A fifth strain is called Reston Ebola, which is found in the Philippines. It was first described in 1989 and isolated from Cynomolgus monkeys and tested at a quarantine facility in Reston, Virginia, US. However, in the Emerging Infectious Disease journal, it claims the first outbreak of the disease occurred around 430BC in ancient Greece. What is the cause of Ebola? The cause of the virus has never been identified and it is still not known how the first case jumped to humans. But researchers believe that the virus is animal borne and that fruit bats are the most likely reservoir or host of the disease. What is the fatality rate? Depending on the strain, the mortality rate can reach 90 . What are the symptoms? The flu like symptoms on average take eight to 10 days to appear after exposure to Ebola. They usually include high fever greater than 38.6C, severe headaches, muscle pain, weakness, diarrhoea, vomiting, abdominal pain and unexplained bleeding that can appear from the eyes, nose, gums and even under the skin. Recovery depends on good healthcare systems and the patient's immune response. Those who recover from Ebola infection develop antibodies that last for at least 10 years. How is it transmitted? Public health officials said it can only be transferred via blood or other bodily fluids but previous research published in the journal, Scientific Reports, proved it could be transmitted by air between species. Scientists in Canada proved pigs infected with Ebola Zaire could pass it on to monkeys without any direct contact with each other. Dr Gary Kobinger from the National Microbiology Laboratory at the Public Health Agency of Canada told the BBC at the time of its investigation in 2012 "We saw a lot of evidence in the lungs of the non human primates that the virus got in that way." Also, Tom Frieden, director of the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention, earlier this year said it was not impossible for the virus to become airborne. Can it be prevented? Currently there is no vaccine but the use of ZMapp drug has been attributed to saving lives but it is still subject to clinical trials to establish its safety. Ebola outbreak map in Africa(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) Number of Ebola Cases In West Africa, 3,440 people out of 7,492 cases have died from Ebola. Meanwhile, 2,069 deaths have been in Liberia, 739 in Guinea, 623 in Sierra Leone, eight in Nigeria and one in the US. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, America's prestigious public health institute, is predicting the number of cases to reach 1.4 million by January. First Incidence of Ebola in US in 1989 In 1989 dozens of macaque, which were imported from the Philippines to the Hazelton Research Products' Reston Quarantine Unit, began dying with Ebola symptoms. Four workers were exposed and tested positive to the virus. At first it was believed it was the Zaire strain but it was later labelled Ebola Reston. Miraculously, the virus strain only killed the primates. The ventilation system was being blamed as the source of spread. "Due to the spread of infection to animals in all parts of the quarantine facility, it is likely that Ebola Reston may have been spread by airborne transmission," wrote Lisa A Beltz, assistant professor, from Kent State University, Ohio, in her book Emerging Infectious Diseases. US Ebola Patent The CDC claims to own a patent of the EboBun strain of Ebola following an outbreak of hemorrhagic fever in Uganda. Its patent number is CA2741523A1 and was awarded in 2010. The patent reveals the US government has sequenced the virus's DNA and claims ownership of any strain which is 70 similar.
The Ebola virus, which has caused deaths from high fever and bleeding in African outbreaks, can also infect without producing illness, according to a new finding by African and European scientists. The possibility of asymptomatic infection was only suggested in earlier studies, they said in last week's issue of The Lancet, a medical journal published in London. Now they said they had documented such infections for the first time. They found that the Ebola virus could persist in the blood of asymptomatic infected individuals for two weeks after they were first exposed to an infected individual. How much longer the virus can persist is unknown. If people can be carriers without showing symptoms, it means control might be more difficult. "This degree of containment would be virtually impossible if symptom free carriers posed a significant threat of infection," Dr. Alan G. Baxter of Newtown, Australia, wrote in an editorial in the same issue of The Lancet. An immediate effect is to raise the need to reassess health policy about one of the most virulent viruses known and to determine how often healthy carriers transmit it, said the scientific team headed by Dr. E. M. Leroy of Franceville, Gabon. Dr. Leroy's team studied 25 individuals who never developed symptoms although they lived with family members and cared for them without using gloves and other precautions in two outbreaks in Gabon in 1996. Using standard virologic techniques, the scientists from Gabon, Germany and France said they could not detect the virus in the blood of the healthy contacts. But Dr. Leroy's succeeded by using a technique known as polymerase chain reaction to grow the tiny amount of virus present. Here is the study published in Lancet. And here is the editor's comment. The Lancet study does not warn of an apocalyptic scenario where any casual contact could cause infection. It is more focused on contagion through sex or blood transfusions. But Western governments and scientists have repeatedly said that Ebola carriers can only infect others if they are showing symptoms. So they need to adjust their strategies to account for potential contagion from people who aren't showing any symptoms. Two national experts on infectious disease transmission both professors in the School of Public Health, Division of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, at the University of Illinois at Chicago report that Ebola can be transmitted by aerosols ... i.e. fluids mixed with air (footnotes omitted) We believe there is scientific and epidemiologic evidence that Ebola virus has the potential to be transmitted via infectious aerosol particles both near and at a distance from infected patients, which means that healthcare workers should be wearing respirators, not facemasks. Aerosols are liquids or small particles suspended in air. An example is sea spray seawater suspended in air bubbles, created by the force of the surf mixing water with air. The important points are that virus laden bodily fluids may be aerosolized and inhaled while a person is in proximity to an infectious person and that a wide range of particle sizes can be inhaled and deposited throughout the respiratory tract. Being at first skeptical that Ebola virus could be an aerosol transmissible disease, we are now persuaded by a review of experimental and epidemiologic data that this might be an important feature of disease transmission, particularly in healthcare settings. Many body fluids, such as vomit, diarrhea, blood, and saliva, are capable of creating inhalable aerosol particles in the immediate vicinity of an infected person. Cough was identified among some cases in a 1995 outbreak in Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo, and coughs are known to emit viruses in respirable particles. The act of vomiting produces an aerosol and has been implicated in airborne transmission of gastrointestinal viruses. Regarding diarrhea, even when contained by toilets, toilet flushing emits a pathogen laden aerosol that disperses in the air. There is also some experimental evidence that Ebola and other filoviruses can be transmitted by the aerosol route. Jaax et alreported the unexpected death of two rhesus monkeys housed approximately 3 meters from monkeys infected with Ebola virus, concluding that respiratory or eye exposure to aerosols was the only possible explanation. Zaire Ebola viruses have also been transmitted in the absence of direct contact among pigsand from pigs to non human primates, which experienced lung involvement in infection. Persons with no known direct contact with Ebola virus disease patients or their bodily fluids have become infected. Experimental studies have demonstrated that it is possible to infect non human primates and other mammals with filovirus aerosols. Ebola is a type of filovirus Altogether, these epidemiologic and experimental data offer enough evidence to suggest that Ebola and other filoviruses may be opportunistic with respect to aerosol transmission. That is, other routes of entry may be more important and probable, but, given the right conditions, it is possible that transmission could also occur via aerosols. In other words, these two infectious disease experts believe that Ebola is already in its current form transmissible via aerosols. They therefore urge all doctors and nurses working with Ebola patients to wear respirators. We need to understand how Ebola is really spread, and then take appropriate counter measures. Indeed, top doctors say that unless contained it could eventually mutate to become airborne. And the Washington Post notes that terrorists could use Ebola as a bio weapon. The longer the outbreak rages, the more likely such a scenario becomes. According to American nurses, the U.S. healthcare system is woefully unprepared to handle Ebola. We need an effort on the scale of World War 2, the Marshall Plan or the moon shot to contain and eradicate this modern plague.
According to a study published in this week's online edition of Protein Science, they have produced a molecule, known as a peptide mimic, that displays a functionally critical region of the virus that is universally conserved in all known species of Ebola. This new tool can be used as a drug target in the discovery of anti Ebola agents that are effective against all known strains and likely future strains. The University of Utah (U of U) work, which was funded by the National Institutes of Health, was conducted by a large collaborative team led by Debra Eckert, Ph.D., (research assistant professor of biochemistry) and Michael Kay, M.D., Ph.D., (professor of biochemistry). Key contributions to this work were provided by Dr. John Dye's laboratory at the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID), the lab of Christopher P. Hill, D.Phil., professor and co chair of the U of U Department of Biochemistry, and a group led by Brett Welch, Ph.D. at Navigen, Inc., a Salt Lake City pharmaceutical discovery and development company. (Navigen has licensed exclusive rights to the technology from the U of U and is currently screening for drugs against the target.) The Utah scientists designed peptide mimics of a highly conserved region in the Ebola protein that controls entry of the virus into the human host cell, initiating infection. Importantly, the researchers were able to demonstrate this peptide target is suitable for use in high throughput drug screens. These kinds of screens allow rapid identification of potential new drugs from billions of possible candidates. Current experimental drugs generally target only one of Ebola's five species. "The current growing epidemic demonstrates the need for effective broad range Ebola virus therapies," says Dr. Tracy R. Clinton, lead author on the study. "Importantly, viral sequence information from the epidemic reveals rapid changes in the viral genome, while our target sequence remains the same. Therefore, our target will enable the discovery of drugs with the potential to treat any future epidemic, even if new Ebola virus strains emerge." Ebola is a lethal virus that causes severe hemorrhagic fever with a 50 percent to 90 percent mortality rate. There are five known species of the virus. Outbreaks have been occurring with increasing frequency in recent years, and an unprecedented and rapidly expanding Ebola outbreak is currently spreading through several countries in West Africa with devastating consequences. The development of an effective anti Ebola agent to protect against natural outbreaks and potential bioterror exposures is an urgent global health need. There are no approved anti Ebola agents, but a number of promising experimental drugs are being aggressively advanced to clinical trials to address the current crisis. Dr. Eckert notes, "Although the current push of clinical trials will hopefully lead to an effective treatment for the Zaire species causing the present epidemic, the same treatments are unlikely to be effective against future outbreaks of a different or new Ebola species. Development of a broadly acting therapy is an important long term goal that would allow cost effective stockpiling of a universal Ebola treatment." Of particular interest, this target was shown to be suitable for the discovery of mirror image peptide inhibitors (D peptides), which are promising drug candidates. Unlike natural peptides, they are not digested by enzymes in the blood. D peptides are also much simpler and less expensive to produce compared to the current most promising approach, antibodies. The Utah group has previously developed highly potent and broadly acting D peptide inhibitors of HIV entry, currently in preclinical studies, and is now adapting this approach to Ebola using the mimics developed in this study. In collaboration with Navigen, several promising lead D peptide inhibitors have already been identified. U of U and Navigen are now seeking additional funding to optimize these inhibitors and advance them into clinical trials in humans.
The Ebola epidemic in West Africa is the worst in recorded history. There have been in excess of 7,400 cases and 3,439 deaths, primarily in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. More recently, the spread of the deadly virus has extended across European borders to Spain, where five people are currently under quarantine, and a further 50 are being closely observed. The passage of the virus to Europe has been attributed to a nurse who contracted the virus from a Spanish missionary that was repatriated from West Africa. The prospect of the Ebola virus spreading in Europe is a waking nightmare for public health officials. They will be anxious that the emergency preparedness plans that have been put in place for each country will be able to withstand, and contain, the spread of the infection. Almost inevitably, concerns are now being raised about how vulnerable we really are. The poor healthcare infrastructure in the countries most affected has influenced the spread of the virus. When the haemorrhagic fever made its first appearance, it was made more difficult to initially contain because staff lacked training and awareness. In fact, at the very beginning, health authorities suspected the outbreak was Lassa fever rather than Ebola. West African hospitals have also struggled to cope with waste disposal in the wake of the virus as well as having to deal with dead bodies, containing infections requires proper handling of everything from bedsheets to used needles and the resources to give each new patient sterile replacements. The virus is transmitted by contaminated body fluids such as blood, saliva, vomit and decomposition fluids coming into contact with another human orifice such as the mouth. It survives for at least a few hours outside the body, and sometimes longer, so there is ample time for it to spread. It is extremely likely that there will soon be a greater number of Ebola patients arriving in the UK, despite all precautions to the contrary. But it is worth noting that over the summer, a UK hospital already treated a British nurse who contracted the disease while undertaking voluntary work in Africa. Similarly the US has been dealing with Ebola patients for several months. Meanwhile, a Norwegian aid worker who contracted the disease in Sierra Leone was flown back to her native country to be treated. It is reassuring that the surveillance systems in both countries have so far effectively contained the infection. Though many other Western countries will have to deal directly with Ebola in the coming months, the risks of a major widespread outbreak are much lower than in west Africa. European countries can rely on the co ordinated and established protocols for emergency responses and containing infections that have already been used with other outbreaks, such as pandemic influenza. Most important of all is making sure staff are trained to recognise symptoms nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, red or bleeding eyes, weight loss, stomach pain and a raised rash. Admittedly this is not foolproof, as reports that the Spanish sufferer was sent home several times undiagnosed would suggest, but it makes a big difference all the same. Suspected sufferers will then be isolated until they are diagnosed, and healthcare staff will most likely handle them wearing body suits, masks and goggles. If they are diagnosed with Ebola, they will remain isolated, receiving plenty of water and transfusions. Apart from experimental treatments, more of which in a moment, the only drugs being used at present are ones for maintaining blood pressure. Patients receiving this sort of supportive treatment do spontaneously recover. One positive about the Ebola virus is that it is not airborne. Unlike a virus like pandemic influenza, this means it can't be transmitted by people spreading infected droplets by coughing or sneezing. It is thought theoretically possible that this could change, though. The prospect of it mutating to become transmissible through air, enabling it to spread much more aggressively, is the key concern at the moment. While this certainly seems to be a real possibility, it is worth looking at what has happened with H5N1 avian influenza ("bird flu"). This highly contagious virus is relatively common in birds in Asia. But despite numerous human infections over the past 15 20 years, it has never mutated to spread through the air. There have also been positive reports about the potential of the combination drug ZMapp to treat the infection. It is an antibody cocktail that can bind to the Ebola virus, although it is much too early to assess effectiveness. Countries who stockpile ZMapp or similar therapeutics should be better placed to halt the infection if the worst happens. The UK's National Institute for Health Research is also moving quickly to trial an experimental Ebola vaccine in humans. But until these efforts come to fruition, the most effective ways of preventing the virus from spreading further are infection surveillance, strict hygiene and clear control measures for contaminated fluids. We have been fortunate not to have had to deal with an Ebola outbreak on a worldwide scale before. But the time has unfortunately come to mount an effective international response.
SALT LAKE CITY Researchers at the University of Utah have identified a part of the Ebola virus that can potentially be treated and or prevented with drugs. And while those drugs have yet to be discovered, the latest findings will help direct further development of pharmaceuticals to fight any of the five known strains of the Ebola virus. "We are not far enough along to intervene in the current outbreak, but we are highly motivated to be prepared for the next one," said Dr. Michael Kay, a professor of biochemistry at the U.'s School of Medicine. He said the Zaire strain of the infection circulating throughout Africa and other parts of the world has already traveled beyond what it was once thought it could and shows "no signs of abating." "This could get much worse before it gets better," Kay said, calling the current Ebola epidemic "unprecedented." As of Tuesday, the latest spread of Ebola had reached more than 8,043 people in West Africa and has resulted in travel related cases in Spain and the United States, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The agency reports that 4,461 cases are confirmed Ebola and of those, 3,866 people have died from the infection, including one American who died Wednesday in Texas. Kay said his work is in earlier stages than others that are closer making their way to the market. One developmental drug, called ZMapp, has been used up in treating just six cases of Ebola in the current epidemic. It was available in only limited supply for testing purposes and because it is a tobacco plant based antibody, Kay said it would be months before manufacturers could come up with more. ZMapp's effectiveness, he said, is also unknown, as it is hard to track in compassionate use situations. The current strain of Ebola, Kay said, also has a less than 50 percent survival rate, "making it hard to figure out if the drug worked or not." "Our fears have been proven that it can get out of control," he said. While the U. research was on the books a few years prior to the recent epidemic, Kay said the timing of the outbreak is good and "lends urgency to our project." Funding that has been hard to come by for an illness that once wasn't much of a worry, he said, now has the attention of the U.S. Food and Drug Administartion and other governing agencies throughout the world. "We knew at some point that Ebola would strike in a heavily populated urban area and would spread in a way that it hasn't before. Previous outbreaks have been in rural areas that are easier to control," Kay said. "Now that it has happened, it definitely adds urgency to push the drug target and develop a drug based on it." The development of an effective anti Ebola agent to protect against natural outbreaks and potential bioterrorism exposure is an urgent global health need and a number of promising experimental drugs are being aggressively advanced to clinical trials to address the current crisis as it threatens to spread. "There are a lot of different strategies," said Debra Eckert, a research assistant at the U. and assistant professor of biochemistry. "Our strategy is unique." The U. team, which has patented its process, has produced a molecule that mimics a critical region of the virus the portion that controls entry into the human host cell, initiating infection. The designed peptide is suitable for testing all potential drugs, as it is the same protein molecule found in all strains of the Ebola virus. Eckert said the U. finding could prove "very pertinent" to future outbreaks. Researchers at the U. are already collaborating with a local drug development company, Navigen, and have conducted tests with the actual Ebola virus that is safely housed at the U.S Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases in Washington, D.C. Kay, who has a penchant for studying viruses, said a viable treatment for Ebola that results from the U. study could be just a couple years away. The study, funded by the National Institutes of Health, was published in this week's online edition of Protein Science. Ebola is an infectious and typically fatal disease marked by fever and internal bleeding. It is spread by contact with bodily fluids of an infected person. While the 2014 Ebola outbreak began in Guinea in December 2013, it has spread to epidemic proportions, infecting more people than have been infected since the viruses were discovered in 1976, according to the World Health Organization. The U. lab has previously extensively studied HIV and is working on projects that include respiratory syncytial virus and other viruses that profoundly impact developing countries. As a medical school student in the 90s, Kay said he was "affected" by outbreaks of small pox, HIV and the Spanish flu. "I had a front row seat to the explosive potential of viral infections and how few tools we have for treating those viral infections," he said. The experience has directed his career and he said he wants his research to have an impact. Email wleonard deseretnews.com Twitter wendyleonards Related Stories 1st Ebola patient diagnosed in the US has died
U.S. airmen building a hospital in Liberia disinfect their hands. U.S. officials leading the fight against history's worst outbreak of Ebola have said they know the ways the virus is spread and how to stop it. They say that unless an air traveler from disease ravaged West Africa has a fever of at least 101.5 degrees or other symptoms, co passengers are not at risk. "At this point there is zero risk of transmission on the flight," Dr. Thomas Frieden, director of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said after a Liberian man who flew through airports in Brussels and Washington was diagnosed with the disease last week in Dallas. (The man died Wednesday.) Other health officials have voiced similar assurances, saying Ebola is spread only through physical contact with a symptomatic individual or their bodily fluids. Yet some scientists who have long studied Ebola say such assurances are premature and they are concerned about what is not known about the latest strain. It is an Ebola outbreak like none seen before, jumping from the bush to urban areas, giving the virus more opportunities to evolve as it passes through multiple human hosts. Dr. C.J. Peters, who battled a 1989 outbreak of the virus among research monkeys and who later led the CDC's most far reaching study of Ebola's transmissibility in humans, said he would not rule out the possibility that it spreads through the air in tight quarters. "We just don't have the data to exclude it," said Peters, who continues to research viral diseases at the University of Texas in Galveston. Dr. Philip K. Russell, a virologist who oversaw Ebola research while heading the U.S. Army's Medical Research and Development Command, also said much was still to be learned. "Being dogmatic is, I think, ill advised, because there are too many unknowns here." If Ebola were to mutate on its path from human to human, said Russell and other scientists, its virulence might wane or it might spread in ways not observed during past outbreaks, which were stopped after transmission among just two to three people, before the virus had a greater chance to evolve. "I see the reasons to dampen down public fears," Russell said. "But scientifically, we're in the middle of the first experiment of multiple, serial passages of Ebola virus in man. ... God knows what this virus is going to look like. I don't." Tom Skinner, a spokesman for the CDC, said health officials were basing their response to Ebola on what has been learned from battling the virus since its discovery in central Africa in 1976. The CDC remains confident, he said, that Ebola is transmitted principally by direct physical contact with an ill person or their bodily fluids. Skinner also said the CDC is conducting lab analyses to assess whether the new strain of Ebola is mutating in ways that would require changes in how to respond it. The results so far have not provided concern, he said. The researchers reached in recent days for this article cited grounds to question U.S. officials' assumptions in three categories. 1. Can airport screenings of prospective travelers to the U.S. from West Africa can reliably detect those who might have Ebola? The CDC says all travelers from West Africa are screened for fever before they get on planes. Individuals who have flown recently from the affected countries suggested that travelers could easily subvert the screening and might have incentive to do so Compared with the depleted medical resources in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, the prospect of hospital care in the U.S. may offer an Ebola exposed person the only chance to survive. A person could pass body temperature checks performed at the airports by taking ibuprofen or any common analgesic. And prospective passengers have much to fear from identifying themselves as sick. Sheka Forna, a dual citizen of Sierra Leone and Britain who manages a communications firm in Freetown, said he considered it "very possible" that people with fever would medicate themselves to appear asymptomatic. It would be perilous to admit even nonspecific symptoms at the airport, Forna said in a phone interview. "You'd be confined to wards with people with full blown disease." (The federal government announced Wednesday that it will screen most travelers arriving from West Africa at five major airports. The checks will include the taking of temperatures. The screenings will begin Saturday at New York's JFK airport and then expand to Washington Dulles, Atlanta, Chicago and Newark.) 2. Can asymptomatic patients spread Ebola? The CDC says they cannot. This assumption is crucial for assessing how many people are at risk of getting the disease. Yet diagnosing a symptom can depend on subjective understandings of what constitutes a symptom, and some may not be easily recognizable. Is a person mildly fatigued because of short sleep the night before a flight or because of the early onset of disease? Moreover, said some public health specialists, there is no proof that a person infected but who lacks symptoms could not spread the virus to others. "It's really unclear," said Michael Osterholm, a public health scientist at the University of Minnesota who recently served on the U.S. government's National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity. "None of us know." Russell, who oversaw the Army's research on Ebola, said he found the epidemiological data unconvincing. "The definition of 'symptomatic' is a little difficult to deal with," he said. "It may be generally true that patients aren't excreting very much virus until they become ill, but to say that we know the course of (the virus' entry into the bloodstream) and the course of when a virus appears in the various secretions, I think, is premature." 3. Is the official assertion that Ebola cannot be transmitted through the air correct? In 1989, virus researcher Charles Bailey supervised the government's response to an outbreak of Ebola among several dozen rhesus monkeys housed for research in Reston, Va. What Bailey learned from the episode informs his suspicion that the current strain of Ebola afflicting humans might be spread through tiny liquid droplets propelled into the air by coughing or sneezing. "We know for a fact that the virus occurs in sputum and no one has ever done a study (disproving that) coughing or sneezing is a viable means of transmitting," he said. Unqualified assurances that Ebola is not spread through the air, Bailey said, are "misleading." Skinner of the CDC said that while the evidence "is really overwhelming" that people are most at risk when they touch either those who are sick or such a person's vomit, blood or diarrhea, "we can never say never" about spread through close range coughing or sneezing.
With news that the first person to be diagnosed with an Ebola virus infection in the U.S. has died, and that a sheriff's deputy who had been out to the infect man's apartment now is being tested for the virus, many Americans are on edge wondering what their risk of catching the often deadly virus is. According to the World Health Organization, Ebola is spread through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, primarily blood, feces, and vomit. Many have asked whether it is possible to catch Ebola from someone coughing on you, and both the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the WHO have said that it is not a major concern like it is with the flu. The CDC denies the possibility that Ebola could be spread by tiny droplets, but once pressed, the WHO has admitted that it is theoretically possible to spread Ebola by coughing or sneezing, but it is not very likely. Doctors, nurses, and others in medical professions can catch Ebola from infected patients if they are not wearing gloves. This is because the virus may enter the body through small cuts on their hands. One can also be infected if they touch the blood of someone with Ebola and then subsequently touch their eyes, nose, or mouth. The possibility of Ebola being spread by air is not a major concern, says WHO. The organization states that in order for their to be airborne spread, people would have to be able to inhale a large enough infectious dose not just a few viruses to actually make them sick. A "suspended cloud of small, dried droplets", such as can happen with measles, would theoretically make it possible for one to catch the Ebola virus through the air. The airborne spread of Ebola has not been observed by infectious disease experts, despite "extensive studies of Ebola virus over several decades." The WHO points out that "spread of the virus via coughing or sneezing is rare, if it happens at all." The WHO explains in a new statement why airborne transmission of Ebola virus is not likely "Theoretically, wet and bigger droplets from a heavily infected individual, who has respiratory symptoms caused by other conditions or who vomits violently, could transmit the virus over a short distance to another nearby person. This could happen when virus laden heavy droplets are directly propelled by coughing or sneezing (which does not mean airborne transmission) onto the mucus membranes or skin with cuts or abrasions of another person." The WHO statement also indicates that there are no documented cases of Ebola spreading in this manner, and noted that when people who have had Ebola have been interviewed, "all cases were infected by direct close contact with symptomatic patients." Scientists have found the Ebola virus in bodily fluids other than blood, including urine, semen, saliva, tears, and breast milk. To date, there is no evidence that the virus spreads through these bodily fluids. It has even been found in saliva, although it was most frequently found in the saliva of patients at a very late stage of illness when the virus had the opportunity to reproduce extensively. Adding fuel to the fears of the possibility of airborne spread of Ebola virus is the fact that a sheriff's deputy that was sent out to the home of the U.S.'s first Ebola victim has now been hospitalized with Ebola like symptoms. The officer entered the apartment of the Ebola victim without any kind of protective clothing or mask. One day later, the officer and others who had entered the apartment with him were told to bag up the clothes they had worn. Their police cars were also taken out of commission. This has raised concerns about their risk of exposure.
The Ebola virus has killed 3,879 people, mostly in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. People have been infected in countries around the world, including Spain, the UK and US The Ebola outbreak continues to spread and fear of catching the disease is rising. So far it has infected around 7,500 people in West Africa. Other isolated cases have appeared in countries around the world. Find out the symptoms of Ebola, how it is transmitted and how is the Ebola virus treated. What are the symptoms of the Ebola virus? Patients with Ebola are often overcome by a sudden onset of fever and weakness, muscle pain and headaches and sore throat, followed by vomiting, stomach pain, diarrhoea and rashes. In some cases, both internal and external bleeding occurs and Ebola patients may also bleed from the ears, eyes, nose or mouth. 'Helpless and heartbroken' Head of Cardiff based charity on the difficulties of dealing with Ebola in Sierra Leone The time interval from infection to onset of symptoms, is two to 21 days. The NHS Choices website says the Ebola virus disease is fatal in 50 90 of cases. The sooner a person is given care, the better the chances that they will survive. How does Ebola spread? Ebola spreads in the human population through human to human transmission if a person comes into contact with the blood, body fluids or organs of an infected person and healthcare workers among those most at risk. In Africa, infection has been documented through the handling of infected chimpanzees, gorillas, fruit bats, monkeys, forest antelope and porcupines found ill or dead or in the rainforest. The NHS advises other ways people can catch Ebola include Touching the soiled clothing of an infected person, then touching their mouth. Having sex with an infected person without using a condom (the virus is present in semen for up to seven weeks after the infected person has recovered). Handling unsterilised needles or medical equipment that were used in the care of the infected person. How is the Ebola virus treated? Ebola virus infections can be diagnosed definitively in a laboratory through several types of tests, but there is no vaccine or cure. Patients need to be placed in isolation in intensive care. Patients are frequently dehydrated and need to be rehydrated with solutions containing electrolytes or intravenous fluids. Malaria, typhoid fever and cholera are among the other diseases which should be ruled out before a diagnosis of Ebola virus disease can be made. No specific treatment is available and new drug therapies are being evaluated.
DALLAS The condition of the only person diagnosed with Ebola on American soil improved a bit Tuesday, as county officials defended their initial response to the infection. Thomas Eric Duncan, 42, remained in critical condition on dialysis and a ventilator, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said. But his liver functions improved slightly from the weekend. And members of Duncan's family said his fever was lower and his blood pressure was normal. Local and national health officials said that none of the 48 people known to have had direct or indirect contact with Duncan while he was potentially infectious has developed symptoms of the virus. And federal officials discussed ramping up inspections of people coming into the United States from parts of West Africa where the virus is active. The World Health Organization estimates that more than 3,400 people have died of Ebola in West Africa, with at least twice as many infected. Duncan's 19 year old son, Karsiah Eric Duncan, thanked his father's caregivers at a news conference Tuesday night. "I want to thank the hospital for all of their support and for trying to help my dad stay alive," he said. Karsiah, who said he hasn't seen his father since he was 3, felt like he was "being called by God" to see him. He tried on Tuesday night but was unable to see him. "I hope that my family is OK and my dad can make it out safely," he said. The handling of his father's case was a topic at Tuesday's meeting of the Dallas County Commissioners Court. Commissioner John Wiley Price said race and a lack of insurance played into Presbyterian's decision not to admit Duncan when he first showed up at the hospital's emergency room on Sept. 26. Duncan, who complained of abdominal pain and a slight fever, told a nurse he had recently been in Africa, according to the hospital. He was sent home with antibiotics, only to return by ambulance two days later. "We know why what happened at Presbyterian happened," Price said. "It is historical what has happened in this community. If a person who looks like me shows up without insurance, they don't get the same treatment." The hospital released a response to Price's accusation through spokesman Wendell Watson "Mr. Duncan was treated the way any other patient would have been treated, regardless of nationality or ability to pay for care. We have a long history of treating a multicultural community in this area." The hospital has not explained why Duncan was discharged on the first visit, despite clear guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that say he should have been hospitalized and isolated. In fact, a doctor treating Duncan at Presbyterian refused Tuesday to answer questions at a hearing of the state Senate Health and Human Services Committee. Pulmonologist Gary Weinstein told senators that he couldn't talk about initial treatment decisions. "Events preceding his first admission are being thoroughly reviewed," he said. Price and county health director Zachary Thompson both defended the response by local health officials, once the infection was identified. "There was no misstep by Dallas County Health and Human Services staff. And I will defend that. I will call the individual out personally that they are lying," Thompson said. The health department learned of the possible virus on Sept. 29, Thompson said. It briefed the Commissioners Court the next day the same day the virus was confirmed. One day after that, a health department official notified the family that had been staying with Duncan that it needed to stay in its apartment, he said. However, officials didn't immediately guard the apartment to make sure people who were supposed to be isolated stayed inside. One child who was supposed to stay home showed up for school the next day. Sheriff's deputies sent into Duncan's apartment to serve a containment warrant that ordered the other occupants not to leave were not told about possible health risks nor given gloves or other protective gear. The health department has been criticized for how long it took to send a sample of Duncans's blood to state and national labs. And it took days to clean out the apartment where Duncan had fallen ill and where people were still living. On his official blog, the CDC director said that the Dallas experience was being used to educate other cities. "Today we hosted a conference call with the fifty state health commissioners to arm them as they work with their state hospitals and health care facilities. We shared lessons learned in many areas including how to prepare hospital emergency departments, how to take travel histories, and how to deal with potentially infected waste," Dr. Tom Frieden wrote. "And we (are) working with Dallas County, Texas, health officials and others to create a catalogue of information, The Big Book of Ebola, for clinicians who need to know in the moment how to respond to a concern about Ebola." Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins said it was legitimate to ask questions about the county's response, but it's not yet time for that. "There will be an exhaustive look at this by a variety of sources," he said. "Right now, our focus is on keeping you safe and not looking in the rear view mirror." Meanwhile, one U.S. Coast Guard sector, covering parts of New York and Connecticut, announced that its ships would be checking on passengers of any boats coming in the area from affected parts of West Africa. "We wanted to have those specific steps identified in advance, so we've prepared the captains of these vessels doing business in our ports for the questions we're going to ask," said Capt. Edward J. Cubanski III, the sector commander. Increased restrictions for inbound air travelers are still in the works, said Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Health's National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. He told CNN that plans were underway to check the temperature and ask questions of some passengers arriving at U.S. airports. Some hospitals in New York City are so worried about a proper Ebola response that they're secretly hiring actors and sending them into emergency rooms reporting mock symptoms, The Associated Press reported. And one of the nation's biggest ambulance companies has issued step by step instructions on how to wrap the interior of its vehicles with protective plastic sheeting.
DALLAS The condition of the only person diagnosed with Ebola on American soil improved a bit Tuesday, as Dallas County officials defended their initial response to the infection. Thomas Eric Duncan, 42, remained in critical condition on dialysis and a ventilator, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said. But his liver functions improved slightly from the weekend. And members of Duncan's family said his fever was lower and his blood pressure was normal. Local and national health officials said that none of the 48 people known to have had direct or indirect contact with Duncan while he was potentially infectious have developed symptoms of the virus. And federal officials discussed ramping up inspections of people coming into the U.S. from parts of West Africa where the virus is active. The World Health Organization estimates that more than 3,400 people have died of Ebola in West Africa, with at least twice as many infected. Duncan's 19 year old son, Karsiah Eric Duncan, thanked his father's caregivers at a news conference Tuesday night. "I want to thank the hospital for all of their support and for trying to help my dad stay alive," he said. Karsiah, who said he hasn't seen his father since he was 3, felt like he was "being called by God" to see him. He tried on Tuesday night but was unable to see him. "Keep praying that my family is going to be OK and my dad makes it out safely," he said. The handling of his father's case was a topic at Tuesday's meeting of the Dallas County Commissioners Court. Commissioner John Wiley Price said race and a lack of insurance played into Presbyterian's decision not to admit Duncan when he first showed up at the hospital's emergency room on Sept. 26. Duncan, who complained of abdominal pain and a slight fever, told a nurse he had recently been in Africa, according to the hospital. He was sent home with antibiotics, only to return by ambulance two days later. "We know why what happened at Presbyterian happened," Price said. "It is historical what has happened in this community. If a person who looks like me shows up without insurance, they don't get the same treatment." The hospital released a response to Price's accusation through spokesman Wendell Watson "Mr. Duncan was treated the way any other patient would have been treated, regardless of nationality or ability to pay for care. We have a long history of treating a multicultural community in this area." The hospital has not explained why Duncan was discharged on the first visit, despite clear guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that say he should have been hospitalized and isolated. In fact, a doctor treating Duncan at Presbyterian refused Tuesday to answer questions at a hearing of the state Senate Health and Human Services Committee. Pulmonologist Gary Weinstein told senators that he couldn't talk about initial treatment decisions. "Events preceding his first admission are being thoroughly reviewed," he said. Price and county health director Zachary Thompson both defended the response by local health officials, once the infection was identified. "There was no misstep by Dallas County Health and Human Services staff. And I will defend that. I will call the individual out personally that they are lying," Thompson said. The health department learned of the possible virus on Sept. 29, Thompson said. It briefed the Commissioners Court the next day the same day the virus was confirmed. One day after that, a health department official notified members of the family that had been staying with Duncan that they needed to stay in their apartment, he said. However, officials didn't immediately guard the apartment to make sure people who were supposed to be isolated stayed inside. One child who was supposed to stay home showed up for school the next day. Sheriff's deputies sent into Duncan's apartment to serve a containment warrant that ordered the other occupants not to leave were not told about possible health risks nor given gloves or other protective gear. The health department has been criticized for how long it took to send a sample of Duncan's blood to state and national labs. And it took days to clean out the apartment where Duncan had fallen ill and where people were still living. On his official blog, the CDC director said that the Dallas experience was being used to educate other cities. "Today we hosted a conference call with the 50 state health commissioners to arm them as they work with their state hospitals and health care facilities. We shared lessons learned in many areas including how to prepare hospital emergency departments, how to take travel histories, and how to deal with potentially infected waste," Dr. Tom Frieden wrote. "And we (are) working with Dallas County, Texas, health officials and others to create a catalogue of information, The Big Book of Ebola, for clinicians who need to know in the moment how to respond to a concern about Ebola." Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins said it was legitimate to ask questions about the county's response, but it's not yet time for that. "There will be an exhaustive look at this by a variety of sources," he said. "Right now, our focus is on keeping you safe and not looking in the rearview mirror." One U.S. Coast Guard sector, covering parts of New York and Connecticut, announced that its ships would be checking on passengers of any boats coming in the area from affected parts of West Africa. "We wanted to have those specific steps identified in advance, so we've prepared the captains of these vessels doing business in our ports for the questions we're going to ask," said Capt. Edward J. Cubanski III, the sector commander. Increased restrictions for inbound air travelers are still in the works, said Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Health's National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. He told CNN that plans were underway to check the temperature and ask questions of some passengers arriving at U.S. airports. Some hospitals in New York City are so worried about a proper Ebola response that they're secretly hiring actors and sending them into emergency rooms reporting mock symptoms, The Associated Press reported. And one of the nation's biggest ambulance companies has issued step by step instructions on how to wrap the interior of its vehicles with protective plastic sheeting. And the CDC is searching for better ways to get information to the public. The agency has scheduled a Twitter question and answer session from 2 to 3 p.m. Dallas time on Wednesday. (Staff writer Julie Fancher contributed to this report.)
The condition of the only person diagnosed with Ebola on American soil improved a bit Tuesday, as Dallas County officials defended their initial response to the infection. Thomas Eric Duncan, 42, remained in critical condition on dialysis and a ventilator, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said. But his liver function improved slightly from the weekend. And members of Duncan's family said his fever was lower and his blood pressure was normal. Local and national health officials said that none of the 48 people known to have had direct or indirect contact with Duncan while he was potentially infectious had developed symptoms of the virus. And federal officials discussed ramping up inspections of people coming into the U.S. from parts of West Africa where the virus is active. The World Health Organization estimates that more than 3,400 people have died of Ebola in West Africa, with at least twice as many infected. Duncan's 19 year old son, Karsiah Eric Duncan, thanked his father's caregivers at a news conference Tuesday night. "I want to thank the hospital for all of their support and for trying to help my dad stay alive," he said. Karsiah, who said he hasn't seen his father since he was 3, felt like he was "being called by God" to see him. He tried on Tuesday night but was unable to see him. "Keep praying that my family is going to be OK and my dad makes it out safely," he said. The handling of his father's case was a topic at Tuesday's meeting of the Dallas County Commissioners Court. Commissioner John Wiley Price said race and a lack of insurance played into Presbyterian's decision not to admit Duncan when he first showed up at the hospital's emergency room on Sept. 26. Duncan, who complained of abdominal pain and a slight fever, told a nurse he had recently been in Africa, according to the hospital. He was sent home with antibiotics, only to return by ambulance two days later. "We know why what happened at Presbyterian happened," Price said. "It is historical what has happened in this community. If a person who looks like me shows up without insurance, they don't get the same treatment." The hospital released a response to Price's accusation through spokesman Wendell Watson "Mr. Duncan was treated the way any other patient would have been treated, regardless of nationality or ability to pay for care. We have a long history of treating a multicultural community in this area." The hospital has not explained why Duncan was discharged on the first visit, despite clear guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that say he should have been hospitalized and isolated. In fact, a doctor treating Duncan at Presbyterian refused Tuesday to answer questions at a hearing of the state Senate Health and Human Services Committee. Pulmonologist Gary Weinstein told senators that he couldn't talk about initial treatment decisions. "Events preceding his first admission are being thoroughly reviewed," he said. 'No misstep' Price and county health director Zachary Thompson both defended the response by local health officials, once the infection was identified. "There was no misstep by Dallas County Health and Human Services staff. And I will defend that. I will call the individual out personally that they are lying," Thompson said. The health department learned of the possible virus on Sept. 29, Thompson said. It briefed the Commissioners Court the next day the same day the virus was confirmed. One day after that, a health department official notified members of the family that had been staying with Duncan that they needed to stay in their apartment, he said. However, officials didn't immediately guard the apartment to make sure people who were supposed to be isolated stayed inside. One child who was supposed to stay home showed up for school the next day. Sheriff's deputies sent into Duncan's apartment to serve a containment warrant that ordered the other occupants not to leave were not told about possible health risks nor given gloves or other protective gear. The health department has been criticized for how long it took to send a sample of Duncan's blood to state and national labs. And it took days to clean out the apartment where Duncan had fallen ill and where people were still living. On his official blog, the CDC director said that the Dallas experience was being used to educate other cities. "Today we hosted a conference call with the fifty state health commissioners to arm them as they work with their state hospitals and health care facilities. We shared lessons learned in many areas including how to prepare hospital emergency departments, how to take travel histories, and how to deal with potentially infected waste," Dr. Tom Frieden wrote. "And we are working with Dallas County, Texas, health officials and others to create a catalogue of information, The Big Book of Ebola, for clinicians who need to know in the moment how to respond to a concern about Ebola." Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins said it was legitimate to ask questions about the county's response, but it's not yet time for that. "There will be an exhaustive look at this by a variety of sources," he said. "Right now, our focus is on keeping you safe and not looking in the rearview mirror." Safety steps One U.S. Coast Guard sector, covering parts of New York and Connecticut, announced that its ships would be checking on passengers of any boats coming in the area from affected parts of West Africa. "We wanted to have those specific steps identified in advance, so we've prepared the captains of these vessels doing business in our ports for the questions we're going to ask," said Capt. Edward J. Cubanski III, the sector commander. Increased restrictions for inbound air travelers are still in the works, said Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Health's National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. He told CNN that plans were underway to check the temperature and ask questions of some passengers arriving at U.S. airports. Some hospitals in New York City are so worried about a proper Ebola response that they're secretly hiring actors and sending them into emergency rooms reporting mock symptoms, The Associated Press reported. And one of the nation's biggest ambulance companies has issued step by step instructions on how to wrap the interior of its vehicles with protective plastic sheeting. And the CDC is searching for better ways to get information to the public. The agency has scheduled a Twitter question and answer session from 2 to 3 p.m. Dallas time on Wednesday. Follow the conversation on CDCgov using the hashtag CDCchat.
(RNN) Liberian Ebola patient who had recently flew from Liberia to the U.S. has died according to reports. Thomas Eric Duncan is the first person in the U.S. to die from the virus. Dr. Thomas Frieden, director of the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention, announced Sunday that Duncan was getting worse. He was downgraded from serious to critical condition at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital. Duncan was not treated with the experimental drug ZMapp because the last available doses were used to treat Dr. Kent Brantly and nurse Nancy Writebol, who were diagnosed with the virus in August while doing medical missionary work in West Africa. It takes several months for ZMapp to culture and become ready for uses, and until Brantly and Writebol, the drug had never been used on humans. The Texas Department of State Health Services released the following statement The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal. Today they lost a dear member of their family. They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts. The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways. We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat.
The first patient ever diagnosed with Ebola outside Africa has died, a Dallas hospital announced Wednesday. "He fought courageously in this battle," Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said in a statement. Duncan's case has shaken the U.S. public since late September. He was the first person ever to arrive in the United States with an undetected case of Ebola. His death also makes Duncan the first person ever to die of Ebola in the United States. Five Americans have been treated or remain in treatment for the virus in Texas, Nebraska and Georgia. None have died. The current Ebola epidemic has killed more than 3,000 people in West Africa since it began last year. The virus, which has no vaccine or cure, begins like the flu and ends with massive internal hemorrhaging. A total of 14 patients have been treated for Ebola outside of West Africa. Only three, including Duncan, have died. Four remain under doctors' care. In Dallas, four people remain under quarantine because of their contact with Duncan prior to his hospitalization. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said Tuesday that Duncan had 10 definite and 38 possible contacts in the United States. Each continues to be monitored in case they develop symptoms that point to Ebola. The hospital expressed sadness at Duncan's death. "Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing," the statement said. "We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time."
Thomas Eric Duncan, the 33 year old man who contracted Ebola in Liberia and later traveled to Dallas, where he was being treated, has died, hospital officials say. In a statement from the company that runs Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, where Duncan was in isolation said Duncan arrived in Dallas on Sept. 20 from Liberia and became ill within a few days. As NPR's Michaleen Doucleff reported last month, Duncan first developed symptoms on Wednesday, Sept. 24, according to the CDC, and first sought care on Friday. On Sunday, Sept. 28, he was placed in isolation at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, according to the Texas Department of State Health Services. Within days, health officials said they were tracing as many as 100 people who had either direct or secondary contact with Duncan for monitoring. They subsequently narrowed the list to about 50, with only about 10 people said to have had close contact and be at the greatest risk for the disease although health officials have repeatedly said the risk was low for all of the so called "contact traces."
DALLAS (CNN AP) Dallas Ebola patient Thomas Eric Duncan died Wednesday morning at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, the hospital said. Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital released a statement Tuesday saying Thomas Eric Duncan was on a ventilator and receiving kidney dialysis. The hospital said his liver function improved after declining over the weekend, but warns that his condition could vary in the coming days. Duncan was from Liberia, and he fell ill after traveling from the Ebola ravaged country to Dallas two weeks ago. He was the first person to be diagnosed in the U.S. with Ebola. Duncan had been hospitalized since Sept. 28. Federal and local officials are monitoring nearly 50 people who had varying degrees of contact with Duncan before his hospitalization. News of Duncan's death comes as a federal official told CNN that airports in the United States will begin taking the temperatures of arriving passengers who have flight itineraries originating from West African countries where Ebola is concentrated. The screenings will begin this weekend or next week, according to the source who has direct knowledge of the screenings.
(WXYZ AP) Thomas Eric Duncan, the Ebola patient that was being treated in Dallas, has died. Duncan arrived in Dallas on Sept. 20 to visit relatives and fell ill a few days later. His sister, Mai Wureh, identified him as the infected man in an interview with The Associated Press. A Dallas emergency room sent Duncan home last week, even though he told a nurse that he had been in disease ravaged West Africa. The decision by Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital to release Duncan could have put others at risk of exposure to Ebola before the man went back to the ER a couple of days later when his condition worsened. He has been kept in isolation at the hospital since Sunday. He was listed Thursday in serious but stable condition. Duncan's neighborhood in Liberia, a collection of tin roofed homes, has been ravaged by Ebola. So many people have fallen ill that neighbors are too frightened to comfort a 9 year old girl who lost her mother to the disease. The 19 year old pregnant woman was convulsing and complaining of stomach pain, and everyone thought her problems were related to her pregnancy, in its seventh month. No ambulance would come for her, and the group that put her in a taxi never did find a hospital. She eventually died, and in the following weeks, all the neighbors who helped have gotten sick or died, neighbors said.
The first person to be diagnosed with Ebola within the US has died, Texas hospital officials have said. Thomas Eric Duncan, who caught the virus in his native Liberia, was being kept in isolation in a Dallas hospital and receiving experimental drugs. Earlier the US announced new security procedures at entry points to check travellers for symptoms of the virus. More than 3,000 people have died and 7,500 infected, mostly in West Africa, in the worst Ebola outbreak yet. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 am," a spokesman said in a statement. The news came shortly after US Secretary of State John Kerry urged all nations to boost their response to combat the virus. "More countries can and must step up," he said in a joint press conference with his British counterpart Philip Hammond. The US has pledged as many as 4,000 troops to the region, while the UK is sending 750 military personnel to Sierra Leone. Duncan, a Liberian national, tested positive in Dallas, Texas, on 30 September, 10 days after arriving on a flight from Monrovia via Brussels. After going to hospital with symptoms, he told them he had been to Liberia but was sent home with antibiotics. Four days later, he was placed in isolation and given an experimental drug to treat Ebola, but his condition continued to worsen. Ten people he came into contact with are being monitored for symptoms. Following Duncan's diagnosis, the first case of contagion outside that continent was confirmed in Spain, where a nurse who treated an Ebola victim in Madrid contracted the virus herself. Ebola spreads through contact with the bodily fluids of someone who has the virus and the only way to stop an outbreak is to isolate those who are infected. Earlier on Wednesday, US officials announced travellers from Ebola affected countries will face increased security scrutiny at American airports. The Department of Homeland Security has ordered agents at airports and other ports to "observe" arrivals for potential signs of Ebola infection. The new security measures, rolled out by the Transportation Security Administration, will reportedly take effect this weekend or early next week. While Duncan was the first person to be diagnosed within the US, three American aid workers and a photojournalist contracted the virus in Liberia.
Thomas Eric Duncan, the 33 year old man who contracted Ebola in Liberia and later traveled to Dallas, where he was being treated, has died, hospital officials say. A statement from the company that runs Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, where Duncan was in isolation, read Duncan is believed to have become infected after he helped a pregnant woman with the disease into a taxi in Liberia that was to take her to a hospital. Hospital officials confirmed last week that Duncan was sent home after an initial exam concluded he suffered from a "low grade common viral disease." The hospital said that although a nurse, working from an Ebola checklist, determined that he had recently traveled from Liberia, that information was "not communicated to the full team." Member station KERA in Dallas quotes Dr. David Lakey, commissioner of Texas Department of State Health Services, as saying "The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal. Today they lost a dear member of their family. They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts. The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways. We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat." Duncan arrived in Dallas on Sept. 20 and became ill within days. As NPR's Michaeleen Doucleff reported last month, Duncan "first developed symptoms on Wednesday, Sept. 24, according to the CDC, and first sought care on Friday. On Sunday Sept. 28 , he was placed in isolation at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, according to the Texas Department of State Health Services." Within days, health officials said they were tracing as many as 100 people who had either direct or secondary contact with Duncan for monitoring. They subsequently narrowed the list to about 50, with only about 10 people said to have had close contact and be at the greatest risk for the disease although health officials have repeatedly said the risk was low for all of the "contact traces."
DALLAS (CBSDFW.COM) Nine days after Thomas Eric Duncan became the first person to be diagnosed with the Ebola virus on American soil, he also became the first person to die from the Ebola virus in this country. Duncan died at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Wednesday at 7 51 am, according to hospital officials. Duncan was admitted to the hospital in critical condition on September 28 and was kept in isolation ever since. Most recently, he had been put on dialysis and was using a ventilator to breathe. The Dallas Medical Examiner's office will be in charge of moving Duncan's body from the hospital. According to the CDC, the virus can be transmitted postmortem through bodily fluids. Therefore, the CDC has issued guidelines to hospitals and mortuaries for how to safely handle the human remains of any person who has contracted Ebola and died from the disease. The CDC recommends that only those trained to handle infected human remains should come in contact with the body and they should wear personal protective equipment including "surgical scrub suit, surgical cap, impervious gown with full sleeve coverage, eye protection (e.g., face shield, goggles), facemask, shoe covers, and double surgical gloves." The body must be wrapped in a plastic shroud at the hospital with all intravenous lines and endotracheal tubes kept in place. The CDC recommends that the body be placed in two leak proof zippered plastic bags before being moved to the morgue. Once at the morgue, the body will be placed in an airtight, secure casket and immediately buried or cremated. According to the CDC, the body should not be embalmed or even removed from the double bags at the mortuary. Autopsies are not recommended. We are waiting on statement from the Dallas Medical Examiner's office regarding the next steps for handling Duncan's body.
Thomas Eric Duncan died Wednesday morning in Texas, according to the hospital where he was being treated for Ebola. Duncan, the first person ever diagnosed with Ebola in the United States, died at 7 51 a.m., according to Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas. "He fought courageously in this battle," the hospital said in a statement. "Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time." Youngor Jallah, the daughter of Duncan's girlfriend Louise Troh, could be heard weeping in the background during a phone call on Wednesday morning. "Youngor is crying right now," said Aaron Yah, Jallah's husband. "She cannot talk." Family members gathered in Dallas were able to see Duncan on Monday at the hospital via a laptop camera in his hospital room. He was on dialysis and a respirator, according to health officials. Saymendy Lloyd, a family spokesperson, had said that the family was told that Duncan's liver was improving and his fever was dropping. Duncan traveled from Liberia to the United States last month. About five days later, he began developing symptoms and sought treatment at the hospital, but he was sent home for reasons that still remain unclear. He was brought back in an ambulance two days later and placed in isolation. On Sept. 30, he was diagnosed with Ebola. Duncan had remained in critical condition for several days and had recently been given experimental treatment. "I'm praying for my family to be okay," Duncan's 19 year old son, Eric Karsiah Duncan, said at his mother's church Tuesday night. "I am praying that my dad makes it out safely....I hope they find a cure." Duncan joined a handful of other Ebola patients who have received experimental drugs during the course of the outbreak.Two U.S. missionaries infected this summer while working in West Africa were given doses of another unapproved drug, known as ZMapp, but the limited supplies of that drug were soon exhausted. An experimental medicine from a Canadian company, Tekmira, was given to another American doctor who was flown to Nebraska from West Africa for treatment. Duncan's family members have questioned why experimental treatments were not used sooner. "We want him to live," said Mawhen Jallah, 28, Troh's daughter, said before he was given this treatment. "So we want the drug the other people used to get saved if they have it." Still, it will be difficult to know how much of a role the experimental drug ultimately played, said Thomas Geisbert, a professor at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston who has researched the Ebola virus for decades. Because Duncan was only given the drug so long after falling ill, it is unclear whether it could have helped. "It may have been given so late that it doesn't make a difference either way," Geisbert said Monday. For public health officials, attention now turns to how they will handle Duncan's body. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has issued guidelines for safe handling of the remains of Ebola patients, which notes that "handling of human remains should be kept to a minimum." It includes detailed steps for "postmortem preparation" and "mortuary care," along with "disposition of remains" which, the CDC says, "should be cremated or buried promptly in a hermetically sealed casket. " "Transportation of remains that contain Ebola virus should be minimized to the extent possible," the document says. Moving human remains out of the United States, the CDC says, "would need to comply with the regulations of the country of destination, and should be coordinated in advance with relevant authorities." Duncan had told his fiancee the day he was diagnosed that he regretted exposing her to the virus, saying that he never would have come to the United States if he knew he was infected. "He apologized to Louise the day they told him what he had," Lloyd said Tuesday. "He told her, 'I'm so sorry all of this is happening. . . . I would not put the love of my life in danger.' " Authorities who had spent time with Duncan's relatives offered their condolences on Wednesday morning. "My thoughts are with the family and friends of Thomas Eric Duncan at this time, especially his fianc e Louise, their son Karsiah and all those who loved him," Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins said in a statement Wednesday. "We are also thinking of the dedicated hospital staff who assisted Mr. Duncan daily while he fought this terrible disease. We offer prayers of comfort and peace to everyone impacted by his passing." State and local health officials, who continue to monitor dozens of people who had contact with Duncan for Ebola symptoms, also sent out messages aimed at the family Per Presby, Mr. Duncan passed away at 7 51 this morning. The City of Dallas offers our deepest condolences to his loved ones. Sana Syed ( dallaspiosana) October 8, 2014 "The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal," David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, said in a statement. "Today they lost a dear member of their family. They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts." The department vowed to continue fighting to contain the spread of Ebola in Texas. While authorities said about 10 people remain at high risk due to contact with Duncan, including relatives who have been isolated, no one else has shown any symptom of the disease so far. DeNeen Brown in Dallas and Brady Dennis, Abby Phillip and J. Freedom du Lac in Washington, D.C., contributed to this report. This post has been updated. First published 11 18 a.m. Last updated 12 04 p.m. RELATED Spanish nurse with Ebola may have touched her face with a glove Post Exclusive How the world failed to stop the Ebola epidemic Here's what the Ebola epidemic (still) looks like in West Africa Travelers from West African countries will face stronger Ebola screening at U.S. airports
DALLAS, Texas Texas Ebola patient Thomas Eric Duncan has died, marking the first Ebola fatality in the United States. NBC News reported Tuesday morning Texas Health Resources have confirmed Duncan's death. Health officials say Duncan may have contracted the virus in Liberia while taking a deathly ill neighbor in Liberia to the hospital in a taxi. He left Monrovia on a Sept. 19 flight and arrived in the U.S. the next day. He started showing symptoms Sept. 24 and went to a Dallas hospital for treatment Sept. 26. He was sent home, only to be brought back by ambulance on Sept. 28 and diagnosed with the deadly virus.
A general view of the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, Texas September 30, 2014. REUTERS Brandon Wade The Liberian man diagnosed with Ebola last month just days after arriving in Texas has died after nearly two weeks in a Dallas hospital's isolation room, officials confirmed. Thomas Eric Duncan, believed to be 42, who became the first person diagnosed with the killer virus on American soil during the current pandemic, died early Wednesday after a battle that sparked a national debate on screening of visitors from West Africa, which has been ravaged by the disease. His death came a day after officials began treating him with an experimental drug and days after he had taken a dramatic turn for the worse. ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Thomas Eric Duncan, a Liberian national, had been placed on a ventilator and kidney dialysis after his health declined over the weekend. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 a.m.," a spokesman from Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said in a statement. Mr. Duncan succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola. He fought courageously in this battle. Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time," the statement said. Duncan arrived in the U.S. on a commercial flight from Liberia in late September. He initially sought treatment at a hospital after feeling ill, but was sent home with antibiotics only to return two days later by ambulance. Duncan had been placed in isolation since Sept. 28. Duncan reportedly had helped carry a 19 year old pregnant woman to a taxi to go to the hospital just five days before he boarded a U.S. bound flight. The woman later died. Texas health officials have been monitoring 10 people who had close contact with Duncan, and 38 others who came into contact with that group. So far, none have shown any symptoms of Ebola, health officials said. "This past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal. Today they lost a dear member of their family," Dr. David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services said in a statement. "They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts. The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways. We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat." Duncan was the first person diagnosed with the deadly virus on U.S. soil, and had been given the experimental medication brincidofovir. A hospital in Nebraska said it is using the same drug to treat an American journalist, Ashoka Mukpo, who was airlifted from Liberia and arrived Monday. Authorities in the United States and the public are on alert following Duncan's diagnosis more than a week ago, which raised concerns that the worst epidemic of Ebola on record could spread from three hardest hit impoverished countries Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. On Monday, President Obama announced that the U.S. government is preparing additional measures to screen passengers in the U.S. and overseas as part of the expanding effort to contain the virus. "We're ... going to be working on protocols to do additional passenger screening both at the source and here in the United States," the president said. Ebola has killed more than 3,400 people since an outbreak in West Africa began in March, out of nearly 7,500 confirmed, probable and suspected cases. Dallas residents have mostly taken in news of Ebola within the city limits calmly, but many have kept a close eye on whether it might spread. Cars of Dallas County Sheriff's deputies who were at the scene of the apartment where Duncan stayed have been scrubbed as a precaution, the sheriff's office said. The hospital and health officials have said mistakes were made in handling Duncan. Duncan's family was legally quarantined on October 2, after refusing to comply with Dallas health official requests that they stay home. They are to remain in isolation for 20 days until the potential incubation period for Ebola is over. The family's home was disinfected on October 4, at which time they were moved a private residence in a gated community that was offered by a volunteer. The Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this report.
Thomas Duncan, the first person to be diagnosed with Ebola in the US, has died, reports The New York Times. Duncan was diagnosed with Ebola on 30 September and died just before 8AM this morning at the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas. The 42 year old Liberian cargo driver was visiting his son and the mother of his son in Dallas when he began to show symptoms. He became infected when he helped a pregnant woman in Liberia who was suffering from Ebola get to a hospital. Upon his diagnosis, Duncan was placed in isolation and was eventually given a dose of the experimental anti Ebola drug brincidofovir . Thus far, no one who came into contact with Duncan prior to his admission to the hospital has developed symptoms. The Ebola outbreak has largely been concentrated in three African countries Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. Over 6,500 have been infected so far, and more than 3,000 have died. Ebola can be controlled through routine hand washing, and by using gloves and other barriers to prevent contact with infectious bodily fluids. Ebola can't be caught through the air. Only direct contact with the body fluids of a person who is showing symptoms of Ebola will spread the disease.
DALLAS Thomas Eric Duncan, 42, the patient with the first case of Ebola diagnosed in the United States and the Liberian man at the center of a widening public health scare, died in isolation at a hospital here Wednesday, hospital authorities said. Duncan died at 7 51 a.m. at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, more than a week after the virus was detected in him Sept. 30. His condition had worsened in recent days to critical from serious as medical personnel worked to support his fluid and electrolyte levels, crucial to recovery in a disease that causes bleeding, vomiting and diarrhea. Duncan was also treated with an experimental antiviral drug, brincidofovir, after the Food and Drug Administration approved its use on an emergency basis. "The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal," Dr. David Lakey, the commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, said in a statement. "Today they lost a dear member of their family. They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts." After he arrived at the Dallas Fort Worth International Airport on Sept. 20, Duncan set off a chain of events that raised questions about health officials' preparedness to detect and contain the deadly virus. His case spread fear and anxiety among those he encountered and turned the places, vehicles and items he touched into biohazardous sites that were decontaminated, dismantled, stored or, in some cases, incinerated. Duncan went to the airport in Liberia on Sept. 19, landed in Dallas the next day and first went to the emergency room at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital feeling ill Sept. 25. He was released by the hospital, which had failed to view him as a potential Ebola case for reasons that remain unclear. He returned there and was admitted Sept. 28 after his condition worsened. Duncan spent nearly two decades separated from the woman he had traveled to Dallas to be with, Louise Troh, 54, with whom he had a son. The couple were apparently rekindling their relationship. Yet in the last days of Duncan's life, each had been quarantined because of the risk of spreading Ebola. Duncan had been a driver at a cargo company in Monrovia, the Liberian capital, living alone in a room he rented from the parents of Marthalene Williams, 19. Neighbors and Williams' parents said Duncan helped the family take Williams to and from a hospital on Sept. 15, shortly before she died of Ebola.
CONNECT 5 TWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE Thomas Eric Duncan, the Liberian national who was hospitalized in Dallas with the Ebola virus, died Wednesday, Texas Health Presbyterian hospital said. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 a.m.," the hospital said on its Facebook page. "Mr. Duncan succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola. He fought courageously in this battle. Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time." The 42 year old Duncan, who was the first person to be diagnosed with the disease in the U.S., arrived in Dallas on Sept. 20 from Liberia. He was admitted to Texas Health Presbyterian on Sept. 28 and it was confirmed he was infected with the virus two days later. "The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal," said Dr. David Lakey, Commissioner, Texas Department of State Health Services. "Today they lost a dear member of their family. They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts. The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways. We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat." Duncan, whose condition steadily deteriorated from the time he was hospitalized, had been heavily medicated, on dialysis and in a semi comatose state, said Saymendy Lloyd, a Washington based Liberian activist who has been acting as a spokeswoman for the family. The four people living in the Dallas apartment where Duncan got sick were moved to a private residence in a gated community, and a hazardous materials crew decontaminated their apartment, city officials said. The treatment of the family drew criticism when they were quarantined in an apartment with Duncan's contaminated belongings for days before a hazardous materials crew arrived to bag up and sanitize the materials. Duncan's son, Eric Duncan, 19, had flown to Dallas Monday to see his father via a Skype like closed circuit video conference, said Saymendy Lloyd, a Washington based Liberian activist who has been acting as a spokeswoman for the family. The video conference was supposed to take place Wednesday, she said. Nurses had planned to prop a laptop near his face, so his son could see and speak to him, Lloyd said. During a few lucid moments recently, Duncan Sr. told a nurse he was excited about the visit by the son he had seen since he was 3 years old, when he left Liberia with his mother to escape civil war. "'I'm so proud of him, I can't wait to see him,'" Thomas Eric Duncan told the nurse, according to Lloyd. Eric Duncan is attending university, where he's on the football team, but Lloyd said the family is withholding the name of the university to protect the son's privacy. Ebola has killed more than 3,400 in Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Senegal and Nigeria, the World Health Organization says. The outbreaks in Nigeria and Senegal which took swift, decisive action to control the virus are likely over. There are no proven treatments or vaccines for Ebola, but several Ebola patients treated in the USA and elsewhere have received experimental, unproven drugs for compassionate use. Ebola patients Kenty Brantly and Nancy Writebol, who both contracted Ebola while working for missionary groups in Liberia, received a drug called ZMapp, which contains man made antibodies against Ebola. That drug's manufacturer, Mapp Bio of San Diego, says there are no more supplies of ZMapp, which was made in small quantities during its early developmental phase. Duncan contracted the disease just before leaving Liberia in mid September when he helped helped carry 19 year old Marthalene Williams, who was later diagnosed with Ebola, into a taxi to go to the hospital after her family was unable to get an ambulance. Williams, who was seven months pregnant, was turned away at the hospital because of lack of space in the Ebola ward, the Times reports. She returned home that evening, hours before she died. At the airport Liberia when he was departing, Duncan signed a form saying that he had not had contact with any person infected by the virus. It is not clear whether Duncan knew of Williams' diagnosis, which initially appeared to be pregnancy related, at the time he left the country. Officials in Liberia said Duncan showed no symptoms when he boarded the plane and he was therefore not contagious. Ebola can only be spread through the bodily fluids of people showing signs of the disease. As the first case of a person diagnosed with the disease in the United States, Duncan's hospitalization drew national attention to the deadly disease and efforts to keep it from spreading. The hospital was widely criticized for initially failing to connect Duncan's symptoms with his recent travel in West Africa, where an outbreak of Ebola has been raging. Afterward, city and state health officials moved quickly to track down as many as 80 to 100 people with whom he had contact in Dallas before he was hospitalized. The case also drew attention to the screening procedures for travelers from West Africa entering the United States, prompting a tightening of regulations. Contributing Rick Jervis CONNECT 5 TWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story http www.wcnc.com story news 2014 10 08 ebola patient in dallas hospital dies 16910793
Thomas Eric Duncan, the patient who was being treated for Ebola in an isolation unit at a Texas hospital, has died, officials said today. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 a.m.," the hospital said in a statement. "Mr. Duncan succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola. He fought courageously in this battle. Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing," the statement said. Duncan, a Liberian man who had traveled to Texas to visit family, was the first person to be diagnosed with the disease while in the U.S. and became the first person to die of the disease in the U.S. Duncan's daughter, Youngor Jallah, was distraught after learning of her father's death. "I am not okay and I don't know what to do," she told ABC News through tears. Duncan was admitted to the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas on Sept. 28. He initially went to the hospital's emergency room with symptoms on Sept. 26. He returned in an ambulance two days later and had been in an isolation unit since then. On Saturday Duncan's condition was downgraded from serious to critical, as doctors worked to save his life. Hospital officials confirmed Tuesday he was on a respirator and receiving kidney dialysis. Duncan was the first person to be given the experimental drug brincidofovir. Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings released a statement reassuring the public that health teams had taken steps to stop the spread of the Ebola virus in Dallas. "We will stop the Ebola virus in its tracts from spreading into our community," said Rawlings. "I want to reinforce to the public, that this was an isolated incident of the Ebola virus contracted by the individual while residing in another country." Judge Clay Jenkins, who helped move Duncan's relatives from a cramped apartment to a donated house, said in a statement his "thoughts are with the family and friends." "We are also thinking of the dedicated hospital staff who assisted Mr. Duncan daily while he fought this terrible disease," wrote Jenkins. According to Duncan's neighbors in Monrovia, Liberia, Duncan might have contracted the deadly virus when he helped take a pregnant woman to a hospital while she was vomiting blood. He traveled with the woman to several facilities that turned her away and then helped carry her back into her home. She died the next day and it was later determined that she died of Ebola. When he departed Liberia on Sept. 19, his temperature was taken at the airport and he was determined to not have a fever. He checked a form at the airport before leaving indicating he had not been in contact with anyone infected by Ebola. It's not clear whether he was aware at the time whether the pregnant woman he helped was suffering from Ebola. Four health workers were brought back from West Africa where they contracted the disease and were treated and released. A fifth person, cameraman Ashoka Mukpo, is being treated at a Nebraska facility. The worst ever Ebola outbreak has already killed at least 3,431 and infected least 4,000 others since it started in March, according to the World Health Organization.
The first Ebola patient diagnosed in the U.S. has died, according to a hospital spokesperson. Thomas Eric Duncan, the man who flew from Monrovia, Liberia to the United States while healthy, landing in Dallas, Texas to visit family and became sick from Ebola infection, is now dead says Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas. He passed away this morning Wednesday , just before 8 00am, Dallas time. Doctors had been saying he was in critical condition on respirator also on dialysis and that he had suffered liver failure over the weekend and was now receiving an experimental medication with no guarantee it could work but opting to try it anyway. The infection of Mr. Duncan and his diagnosis had not been without controversy as the hospital didn't identify it at first during his first visit and it is what had sparked increase in concern for Ebola spreading in the United States. WATCH for more on this story READ a statement from Texas Department of State Health Services "The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal. Today they lost a dear member of their family. They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts. The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways. We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat." Dr. David Lakey, Commissioner, Texas Department of State Health Services
The first person diagnosed with Ebola in the United States died Wednesday, more than a week after public health authorities confirmed he had the disease. Thomas Eric Duncan had traveled from Liberia to Dallas, where he fell ill and was taken to Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital. Sept. 25 Seeks medical care at hospital's emergency room for fever and abdominal pain tells nurse he had traveled from Africa. Sept. 28 Returns to hospital by ambulance and is placed in isolation because doctors suspect Ebola. Sept. 30 Tests positive for Ebola. Oct. 2 Members of the family with whom Duncan was staying are confined to their home under armed guard. Oct. 3 Health officials say they are monitoring the health of nearly 50 people who had varying degrees of contact with Duncan, including 10 considered at higher risk. None has shown symptoms. Oct. 4 Hospital downgrades his condition from serious to critical. Oct. 7 Hospital confirms Duncan is on a breathing machine and kidney dialysis.
Chairman Michael McCaul, R Austin, announced that the House Homeland Security committee will hold a hearing in Texas to discuss the coordination and responses of government officials to the first confirmed Ebola virus case in the United States. The hearing will be at the Dallas Fort Worth International Airport on Friday at noon. The list of speakers has yet to be announced. "At this hearing key federal and state officials will discuss the efforts that have been taken to respond to the first case of Ebola in the United States," McCaul said in a statement. "We will also examine ways we can continue to improve our preparedness and capabilities, particularly when it comes to screening passengers entering the country." Hospital officials confirmed Wednesday that Thomas Duncan, the first person in the United States to test positive for Ebola, died around 8 a.m. Two weeks ago, Duncan traveled from Liberia to Dallas when he began to show symptoms of the virus. He was being treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas. Four of Duncan's family members are quarantined and now monitored for 21 days to see if symptoms develop. Another 40 people who may have had contact with the Ebola patient are also being monitored.
Thomas Eric Duncan, the first Ebola patient diagnosed in the U.S., has died. Wilmot Chayee AP DALLAS The Liberian man who was diagnosed with Ebola in Dallas, the first case of the deadly disease in the U.S., died on Wednesday morning, the hospital treating him announced. Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas said Thomas Eric Duncan died at 7 51 a.m. Wednesday. He had been in critical condition for days, and hospital officials a day earlier had said he was receiving life support assistance from a ventilator and dialysis machine. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 a.m.," the hospital said in a statement, adding, "He fought courageously in this battle. Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time." Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins, the area's top elected official, mourned Mr. Duncan's passing. Related Articles U.S. to Monitor Travelers Chimerix Shares Fall After Patient Dies New York Hospitals Prep for Ebola Doctor Ebola Infection in Spain Might Be Human Error Health Care Workers Face Ebola Risks Fate of Ebola Stricken Medical Worker's Dog Sparks Outcry in Spain Ebola Patient in Dallas Receiving Chimerix Experimental Drug Dallas Mayor Says There Are Zero Symptoms of Ebola Among Residents Dallas Man Tells of U.S. Ebola Patient's Decline Five Things About Ebola in the U.S. Ebola is a highly contagious virus, but only if you come into contact with certain bodily fluids of those infected. What do scientists know about how it's transmitted? WSJ's Jason Bellini has TheShortAnswer. "My thoughts are with the family and friends of Thomas Eric Duncan at this time, especially his fianc e Louise, their son Karsiah and all those who loved him," Judge Jenkins said. "We are also thinking of the dedicated hospital staff who assisted Mr. Duncan daily while he fought this terrible disease." Louise Troh, the woman Mr. Duncan was visiting in the U.S., with whom he shared a son and had been staying in a Dallas apartment after falling ill, said in a statement that Mr. Duncan's friends and family would be "grieving for a long time" over his loss. "His suffering is over. My family is in deep sadness and grief, but we leave him in the hands of God," Ms. Troh said in the statement. "Our deepest sympathies go out to his father and family in Liberia and here in America. Eric was a wonderful man who showed compassion toward all." She added that friends and family members hoped the circumstances surrounding his death, including an early delay in his Ebola diagnosis, would be investigated. "I trust a thorough examination will take place regarding all aspects of his care," the statement said. "I am now dealing with the sorrow and anger that his son was not able to see him before he died." Mr. Duncan had also been receiving an experimental drug made by Chimerix Inc., brincidofovir, to treat his Ebola, hospital officials said. But the all out effort to save his life still failed, underscoring the lethality of a disease outbreak that has killed more than 3,000 people in Africa, according to the World Health Organization. Larry Pickering, senior adviser to the director of a division of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said it was premature to draw any conclusions about the effect of the experimental Chimerix drug on the Dallas patient. "One patient, one drug, you can't draw any conclusions from it," Dr. Pickering said at an infectious disease conference in Philadelphia. "These patients are extremely sick. Unfortunately, this person died. We have a long way to go before we can clarify what drugs will be effective for Ebola virus." When told of the news, Joe Joe Jallah, Ms. Troh's ex husband, who visited Mr. Duncan several times at the Dallas apartment where he was staying, said, "Oh, my god." Mr. Jallah had been at the apartment when his daughter, Youngor, a nurse's aide, decided to call 911 so that Mr. Duncan could get help. He said he was deeply saddened to hear about Mr. Duncan's death and worried about his own welfare and that of his daughter. "I'm sad, and I'm sorry," he said, sounding shaken. Back in the muddy neighborhood on the outskirts of Monrovia, where Mr. Duncan lived under a tin roof in a one bedroom home, the woman next door, Irene Seydou, learned of the news in a call with a reporter. "Dear God," she said into the phone. "He was a nice man!" Mr. Duncan likely contracted the disease helping carry a pregnant teenager to an Ebola clinic last month, Ms. Seydou and other neighbors have recalled. "He was just helping carrying her to the hospital," she said. "Now, he's not here." David Lakey, the commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, said public health officials had faced "an enormous test" in responding to Mr. Duncan's case, but that "for one family, it has been far more personal." "The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways," Dr. Lakey said in a statement. "We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat." Doctors at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas initially sent Mr. Duncan home with a prescription for antibiotics after he first arrived at the hospital's emergency room on the night of Sept. 25, complaining that he felt ill. He was only admitted to the hospital three days later, on Sept. 28, when he returned via ambulance after his symptoms had worsened. He was formally diagnosed with Ebola two days after that, on Sept. 30. By that time, Mr. Duncan had come into close contact with emergency medical technicians, and five children he had been around had attended Dallas public schools last Monday and Tuesday. One child also attended a middle school last Wednesday, school officials have said. The hospital released a statement last Thursday evening saying that an electronics record glitch had prevented physicians from seeing the information nurses collected from Mr. Duncan that he had recently arrived from Africa. But it reversed its position last Friday evening, saying that Mr. Duncan's travel history was available to physicians as well as nurses in its electronic health records. Mr. Duncan's case has served as a forceful reminder to U.S. hospitals and public health officials that Ebola is a threat even in countries with advanced health care systems. It has also been a wake up call for residents in his home in faraway Liberia, where for weeks residents refused to believe that the disease sweeping from home to home was Ebola. Neighbors in Liberia insisted both to other neighbors and to government officials that ill loved ones had low blood pressure, or had been in a car wreck. Then, Mr. Duncan, thousands of miles west, checked into a Dallas hospital, sending a scrum of foreign journalists and health officials into the area where he lived. The scene brought children to tears, and saw adults, visibly worried, gathering around to collect gloves and disinfectant tablets from health workers. Now, Mr. Duncan's neighbors have accepted that Ebola is real, deadly, and present in their crowded community. "Most of them are washing their hands continuously," said Andrew Babble, an official with Liberia's ministry of health, who dropped by on Monday to investigate whether there had been any new cases. There hadn't. "They're doing what they supposed to do," he said. "There's progress." Dan Frosch contributed to this article. Write to Miguel Bustillo at miguel.bustillo wsj.com and Ana Campoy at ana.campoy wsj.com
After the first person diagnosed with Ebola in the U.S. has died in a Dallas hospital, Shannon Rae Green shares other worldwide developments on the fight to stop the deadly disease. (USA NOW, USA TODAY) 2771 CONNECT 441 TWEET 19 LINKEDIN 174 COMMENTEMAILMORE Thomas Duncan, the Liberian national who was the first person diagnosed with Ebola in the United States, died Wednesday at a Dallas hospital, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said. "He fought courageously in this battle," said Wendell Watson, a hospital spokesman. "Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time." USA TODAY Cameraman with Ebola gets blood transfusion The 42 year old Duncan, who arrived in Dallas on Sept. 20, was admitted to Texas Health Presbyterian on Sept. 28 on his second visit to the facility for treatment. He was initially given antibiotics and sent home when hospital staff failed to connect his symptoms to his recent travel to Liberia, where an outbreak of Ebola is raging. After returning to the hospital, suffering from vomiting and severe diarrhea, Duncan was quickly admitted and placed in isolation. Two days later, the hospital confirmed he was infected with the deadly virus. "The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal," said David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services. "Today they lost a dear member of their family. They have our sincere condolences. ... The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways. We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat." Duncan, whose condition steadily deteriorated from the time he was hospitalized, had been heavily medicated, on dialysis and in a semi comatose state, said Saymendy Lloyd, a Washington based Liberian activist who has been acting as a spokeswoman for the family. USA TODAY Ebola virus outbreak How you can help The four people living in the Dallas apartment where Duncan got sick were moved to a private residence in a gated community, and a hazardous materials crew decontaminated their apartment, city officials said. The treatment of the family drew criticism when they were quarantined in the apartment with Duncan's contaminated belongings for days before a hazardous materials crew arrived to bag up and sanitize the materials. Duncan's son, Eric Duncan, 19, had flown to Dallas Monday to see his father via a Skypelike closed circuit video conference, said Lloyd. The video conference was supposed to take place Wednesday, she said. Nurses had planned to prop a laptop near Duncan's face, so his son could see and speak to him, Lloyd said. During a few lucid moments recently, Duncan had told a nurse he was excited about the visit by the son he had not seen since he was 3 years old, when he left Liberia with his mother to escape civil war. "'I'm so proud of him, I can't wait to see him,'" Duncan told the nurse, according to Lloyd. Eric Duncan is attending university, where he's on the football team, but Lloyd said the family is withholding the name of the university to protect the son's privacy. Ebola has killed more than 3,430 people in Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Senegal and Nigeria, the World Health Organization says. The outbreaks in Nigeria and Senegal which took swift, decisive action to control the virus are likely over. There are no proven treatments or vaccines for Ebola, but several Ebola patients treated in the USA and elsewhere have received experimental, unproven drugs for compassionate use. The odds were stacked against Duncan, doctors say. About 70 of Ebola patients in West Africa are dying of the virus, including 60 of those who get to the hospital, said Robert Murphy, a professor of medicine and biomedical engineering at Northwestern University in Chicago. The two day delay at the Dallas hospital before doctors realized he had Ebola likely contributed to his deterioration. Such delays can be deadly with infectious diseases, Murphy said. "The quicker we can get patients into care, the better their odds for survival. He may have been too far gone for even our best supportive care," said Amesh Adalja, infectious disease specialist at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. Three Americans treated for Ebola Kent Brantly, Nancy Writebol and Richard Sacra were evacuated from Liberia to top flight American hospitals with specialized biocontainment units developed to treat Ebola and other dangerous diseases. All three survived. "We've gotten lucky with the airlifted cases that they were able to get good supportive care," Adalja said. But doctors may have had a more difficult time with Duncan. "We don't know his past medical history," such as whether he had any serious chronic diseases in addition to Ebola, Adalja said. Duncan contracted the disease just before leaving Liberia in mid September when he helped helped carry Marthalene Williams, 19, who was later diagnosed with Ebola, into a taxi to go to the hospital after her family was unable to get an ambulance. Williams, who was seven months pregnant, was turned away at the hospital because of lack of space in the Ebola ward. She returned home that evening, hours before she died. At the airport Liberia when he was departing, Duncan signed a form saying that he had not had contact with any person infected by the virus. It is not clear whether Duncan knew of Williams' diagnosis, which initially appeared to be pregnancy related, at the time he left the country. Officials in Liberia said Duncan showed no symptoms when he boarded the plane and he was therefore not contagious. Ebola can only be spread through the bodily fluids of people showing signs of the disease. Unlike an infection such as tuberculosis, which primarily attacks the lung, Ebola affects many organs of the body at once, said Adalja. Massive diarrhea and vomiting can cause dehydration and disrupt the normal balance of electrolytes, such as potassium, causing heart rhythm problems, he said. The virus can cause bleeding by making tiny holes in blood vessels and by harming platelets, a type of blood cell that normally helps the blood to clot. Ebola can cause kidney and liver failure, and prompt the immune system to overreact, further stressing the body. Many patients with Ebola die of septic shock, or a bloodstream infefction, Adalja said. As the first case of a person diagnosed with the disease in the United States, Duncan's hospitalization drew national attention to the deadly disease and efforts to keep it from spreading. After Duncan's condition was diagnosed, city and state health officials moved quickly to track down as many as 80 to 100 people with whom he had contact in Dallas before he was hospitalized. The case also drew attention to the screening procedures for travelers from West Africa entering the United States, prompting a tightening of regulations. Contributing Rick Jervis 2771 CONNECT 441 TWEET 19 LINKEDIN 174 COMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story http usat.ly 1xpc7WF
20 CONNECT 7 TWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE The current outbreak of Ebola in West Africa is the largest since the virus was first discovered in 1976. Until Sept. 30, no cases of this disease, which has a 50 fatality rate, had been diagnosed in humans in the United States. Sept. 19. Thomas Eric Duncan leaves Monrovia, Liberia, for a trip to the United States. He has been exposed to Ebola but is not exhibiting symptoms, so he is not contagious. It is unclear whether he knew he had been exposed. Sept. 20. After changing planes in Brussels, Belgium, and at Washington Dulles International Airport, Duncan arrives in Dallas to visit his sister. Sept. 24. Duncan's family members tell U.S. authorities this is the day he first felt sick. That is when he likely became contagious. Sept. 26. Duncan seeks treatment at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas and is sent back to his sister's apartment with antibiotics. Sept. 28. Duncan is transported to the same hospital by ambulance. He is critically ill and put in isolation in the hospital's intensive care unit. Sept. 30. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirms that Duncan has been stricken with the Ebola virus, the first patient to be diagnosed in the USA. Oct. 1. Duncan's condition is upgraded from critical to serious, and health officials say they are closely monitoring a second patient who had contact with Duncan. Others who have been in contact with Duncan, including paramedics and children, are being observed for symptoms. Oct. 2. Four members of Duncan's family are placed under quarantine until Oct. 19. They could face criminal charges if they don't stay inside their apartment the Red Cross and an area food bank have been bringing them provisions. Health officials are taking their temperatures twice a day, and so far they aren't showing any symptoms. Oct. 3. The four family members are moved to a private home during their quarantine because no other apartment complexes would take them. Ebola is contagious only if person is experiencing active symptoms. Incubation period for symptoms is 2 21 days average 8 10 days CDCchat Dr. Tom Frieden ( DrFriedenCDC) October 2, 2014 Oct. 5. Duncan's condition is downgraded to critical. Oct. 8. Duncan dies at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas. Sources World Health Organization, The Associated Press 20 CONNECT 7 TWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story http usat.ly 1vyhO5v
Thomas Eric Duncan the man with the first case of Ebola in the US died earlier today. The 42 year old Liberian man passed away in isolation at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, Texas. Duncan was confirmed as the first case of the Ebola in the US on Sept. 30. He was kept in isolation in the Dallas hospital as his condition worsened from serious to critical. Doctors were monitoring his fluid and electrolyte levels and used an experimental drug called brincidofovir to treat the illness. The Texas Department of State Health Services issued the following statement The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal. Today they lost a dear member of their family. They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts. Duncan first arrived at Dallas Fort Worth International Airport on Sept. 20 to reunite with a woman he hadn't seen in close to 20 years. More on Ebola in the US Ebola 2014 White House NOT Considering Travel Ban Ebola Facts How Do You Get Ebola Virus? What Causes It? Ebola Zombies Claims of Victims Rising from the Dead Heat Up Twitter CDC Confirms First Case of Ebola in the US 5 Things to Know Ebola Outbreak in Atlanta? Nope, Yahoo's Twitter Was Hacked
Ebola patient Thomas Eric Duncan died Wednesday morning, according to a statement from a Texas Health Resources spokesperson. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 am," says the statement made by Wendell Watson, public relations director at the hospital. "Mr. Duncan succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola. He fought courageously in this battle," the statement says. Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins also released a statement, saying his thoughts are with Duncan's family and friends, "especially his fiancee Louise, their son Karsiah and all those who loved him." Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings's statement says in part that the city "will stop the Ebola virus in its tracks from spreading into our community. I want to reinforce to the public, that this was an isolated incident of the Ebola virus contracted by the individual while residing in another country." Duncan, 42, arrived in Dallas on Sept. 20 and fell ill a few days later. He went to the emergency room at Texas Health Presbyterian Dallas Hospital on Sept. 25, but was discharged. He returned two days later and was diagnosed with Ebola on Sept. 30. He was given the experimental drug brincidofovir. Duncan had stayed with his girlfriend, Louise Troh, and other family members at The Ivy Apartments in Dallas before he was hospitalized. Troh and the three other family members who had been quarantined in the apartment were moved Friday to an undisclosed location. They are considered "high risk" contacts, and another 38 people, including the ambulance crew that brought Duncan to the hospital, are seen as "low risk" contacts. The quarantine period is 21 days after possible exposure. The apartment where Duncan stayed was cleaned up by The Cleaning Guys of Fort Worth, who donned hazmat suits and worked around the clock to do the job. Zachary Thompson, Dallas County's Health and Human Services director, is asking the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to conduct an assessment of the northeast Dallas complex or recommend someone else to do one, for the "comfort level" of the residents at the apartment complex. The Dallas school district plans to make counseling available to students and staff, according to a statement posted online. The statement says the five students who possibly had contact with Duncan still have no symptoms and will not return to school until the 21 day quarantine period is over. Dr. David Lakey, the commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, in a statement called the past week "an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal. Today they lost a dear member of their family." He added, "We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat."
DALLAS The first patient to be diagnosed with Ebola in the United States died from the disease Wednesday and now Dallas health officials are facing a situation they have not before experienced how to handle a body that could remain highly contagious for several days. Thomas Eric Duncan, 42, had been in isolation at Texas Health Presbyterian since Sept. 28. His death comes four days after his condition was downgraded from serious to critical. Duncan had been on a ventilator for several days and was receiving kidney dialysis. Last weekend he started receiving an experimental drug called brincidofovir. It was not immediately clear what would happen to his body. "It's been discussed, but there's been no conclusion," said Zachary Thompson, director of Dallas County Health and Human Services, told Yahoo News on Monday. In early August, medical missionary Kent Brantly became the first U.S. patient to be treated for Ebola after he contracted the disease in West Africa and was transported to Emory University Hospital in Atlanta. Soon after, the CDC published a document titled "Guidance for Safe Handling of Human Remains of Ebola Patients in U.S. Hospitals and Mortuaries," which states that the "handling of human remains should be kept to a minimum." Because Ebola is transmitted by direct contact with bodily fluids, the CDC recommends hospital staff should not attempt to clean the deceased or remove any medical lines or tubes. Instead, "the body should be wrapped in a plastic shroud" and immediately placed in two thick and zippered leakproof bags for transport to the morgue. What this means for family is likely no chance to mourn loved ones at a traditional funeral service. Dallas County Medical Examiner Dr. Jeffrey Barnard did not return calls for this story. His office contracts with the Anatomical Board of the State of Texas to collect and transport corpses. An employee who answered the phone in the board's Dallas office on Monday declined to say if there was plan should Duncan pass away. "I can't give any information out," the woman told Yahoo News. "I have to end the call." Dallas County has been the lead agency for the Ebola investigation and containment in Dallas, but Thompson said Monday before news broke of Duncan's death that his local team would defer to other experts if he did not survive. "The state and the CDC will make a recommendation on how the body will be disposed of," said Thompson, whose office was criticized for being slow to decontaminate the Dallas apartment where Duncan stayed when he arrived in Texas from Liberia. The CDC recommends autopsies be avoided, and that no embalming be performed. It's been a topic of discussion at the Dallas Institute of Funeral Service, where Wayne Cavender is an instructor and administrator. "Since they don't have a good handle on controlling the disease itself, they are worried about an epidemic," Cavender told Yahoo News. "So that's one way to help keep it from going further. Because if we embalm, we are going to come in contact with all the body fluids and everything. With universal precautions we shouldn't, but accidents happen on occasion." Instead, the CDC says, the "remains should be cremated or buried promptly in a hermetically sealed casket." The casket must secure "against the escape of microorganisms" and have valid documentation for being airtight. "There's really not an airtight casket," said Cavender, who has been in the funeral business for 28 years. "The sealer caskets that they sell are not a guaranteed type of sealing issue. It's not completely airtight because you have to have a way to open them up and so forth. It's not like it's vacuum sealed," he said. But the CDC warns that at no point should the sealed bags or casket be opened for viewing. Duncan had recently traveled to Dallas from West Africa where the World Health Organization estimates that Ebola has killed more than 3,400 people this year. Health officials say traditional African burials, in which family members wash the body, has caused the epidemic to spread faster. Cavender said he fully supports the CDC's stringent standards for this country, but knows it could cost a family a proper goodbye. "Everybody needs to bury their dead and have a funeral and viewing if that's what they want," he said. "That's the government saying you can't do that. It's very unfortunate for the family in that case." (This story originally published on Tuesday, Oct. 7, and was updated on Oct. 8.)
Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person diagnosed with Ebola in the U.S., has died. WSJ's Jeannette Neumann and Dr. Nancy Simpkins discuss on Lunch Break with Tanya Rivero. Photo AP DALLAS The Liberian man who was diagnosed with Ebola in Dallas, the first case of the deadly disease in the U.S., died on Wednesday morning, the hospital treating him announced. Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas said Thomas Eric Duncan died at 7 51 a.m. Wednesday. He had been in critical condition for days, and hospital officials a day earlier had said he was receiving life support assistance from a ventilator and dialysis machine. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 a.m.," the hospital said in a statement, adding, "He fought courageously in this battle. Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time." Mr. Duncan had also been receiving an experimental drug made by Chimerix Inc., CMRX 8.64 Chimerix Inc. U.S. Nasdaq 30.36 2.87 8.64 Oct. 8, 2014 1 51 pm Volume (Delayed 15m) 10.84M P E Ratio N A Market Cap 1.19 Billion Dividend Yield N A Rev. per Employee 67,115 10 08 14 Dallas Ebola Patient Dies 10 08 14 Chimerix Shares Fall Sharply A... 10 06 14 U.S. Weighing Additional Passe... More quote details and news " CMRX in Your Value Your Change Short position brincidofovir, to treat his Ebola, hospital officials said. But the all out effort to save his life still failed, underscoring the lethality of a disease outbreak that has killed more than 3,000 people in Africa, according to the World Health Organization. Larry Pickering, senior adviser to the director of a division of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said it was premature to draw any conclusions about the effect of the experimental Chimerix drug on the Dallas patient. "One patient, one drug, you can't draw any conclusions from it," Dr. Pickering said at an infectious disease conference in Philadelphia. "We have a long way to go before we can clarify what drugs will be effective for Ebola virus." Related Articles U.S. to Check Travelers' Temperatures Britain to Step Up Ebola Fight in West Africa Chimerix Shares Fall After Patient Dies New York Hospitals Prep for Ebola Doctor Ebola Infection in Spain Might Be Human Error Health Care Workers Face Ebola Risks Five Things About Ebola in the U.S. Ebola is a highly contagious virus, but only if you come into contact with certain bodily fluids of those infected. What do scientists know about how it's transmitted? WSJ's Jason Bellini has TheShortAnswer. Louise Troh, the woman Mr. Duncan was visiting in the U.S., with whom he shared a son and had been staying in a Dallas apartment after falling ill, said in a statement that Mr. Duncan's friends and family would be "grieving for a long time" over his loss. "His suffering is over. My family is in deep sadness and grief, but we leave him in the hands of God," Ms. Troh said in the statement. "Our deepest sympathies go out to his father and family in Liberia and here in America. Eric was a wonderful man who showed compassion toward all." She added that friends and family members hoped the circumstances surrounding his death, including an early delay in his Ebola diagnosis, would be investigated. "I trust a thorough examination will take place regarding all aspects of his care," the statement said. "I am now dealing with the sorrow and anger that his son was not able to see him before he died." Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins, the area's top elected official, mourned Mr. Duncan's passing. "My thoughts are with the family and friends of Thomas Eric Duncan at this time, especially his fianc e Louise, their son Karsiah and all those who loved him," Judge Jenkins said. "We are also thinking of the dedicated hospital staff who assisted Mr. Duncan daily while he fought this terrible disease." When told of the news, Joe Joe Jallah, Ms. Troh's ex husband, who visited Mr. Duncan several times at the Dallas apartment where he was staying, said, "Oh, my god." Mr. Jallah had been at the apartment when his daughter, Youngor, a nurse's aide, decided to call 911 so that Mr. Duncan could get help. He said he was deeply saddened to hear about Mr. Duncan's death and worried about his own welfare and that of his daughter. "I'm sad, and I'm sorry," he said, sounding shaken. Back in the muddy neighborhood on the outskirts of Monrovia, where Mr. Duncan lived under a tin roof in a one bedroom home, the woman next door, Irene Seydou, learned of the news in a call with a reporter. "Dear God," she said into the phone. "He was a nice man!" Mr. Duncan likely contracted the disease helping carry a pregnant teenager to an Ebola clinic last month, Ms. Seydou and other neighbors have recalled. "He was just helping carrying her to the hospital," she said. "Now, he's not here." David Lakey, the commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, said public health officials had faced "an enormous test" in responding to Mr. Duncan's case, but that "for one family, it has been far more personal." "The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways," Dr. Lakey said in a statement. "We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat." Doctors at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas initially sent Mr. Duncan home with a prescription for antibiotics after he first arrived at the hospital's emergency room on the night of Sept. 25, complaining that he felt ill. He was only admitted to the hospital three days later, on Sept. 28, when he returned via ambulance after his symptoms had worsened. He was formally diagnosed with Ebola two days after that, on Sept. 30. By that time, Mr. Duncan had come into close contact with emergency medical technicians, and five children he had been around had attended Dallas public schools last Monday and Tuesday. One child also attended a middle school last Wednesday, school officials have said. The hospital released a statement last Thursday evening saying that an electronics record glitch had prevented physicians from seeing the information nurses collected from Mr. Duncan that he had recently arrived from Africa. But it reversed its position last Friday evening, saying that Mr. Duncan's travel history was available to physicians as well as nurses in its electronic health records. Mr. Duncan's case has served as a forceful reminder to U.S. hospitals and public health officials that Ebola is a threat even in countries with advanced health care systems. It has also been a wake up call for residents in his home in faraway Liberia, where for weeks residents refused to believe that the disease sweeping from home to home was Ebola. Neighbors in Liberia insisted both to other neighbors and to government officials that ill loved ones had low blood pressure, or had been in a car wreck. Then, Mr. Duncan, thousands of miles west, checked into a Dallas hospital, sending a scrum of foreign journalists and health officials into the area where he lived. The scene brought children to tears, and saw adults, visibly worried, gathering around to collect gloves and disinfectant tablets from health workers. Now, Mr. Duncan's neighbors have accepted that Ebola is real, deadly, and present in their crowded community. "Most of them are washing their hands continuously," said Andrew Babble, an official with Liberia's ministry of health, who dropped by on Monday to investigate whether there had been any new cases. There hadn't. "They're doing what they supposed to do," he said. "There's progress." Meanwhile another person being treated for Ebola in the U.S., Ashoka Mukpo, a freelance American journalist diagnosed with the disease while working in Liberia, was in stable condition at the Nebraska Medical Center on Wednesday, said spokesman Taylor Wilson. "He has a serious disease but he is stable right now," Mr. Wilson said. Mr. Mukpo, the fifth American to have contracted the virus while working in West Africa, is also being treated with brincidofovir. He was expected to be given a blood transfusion from Kent Brantly, an American missionary doctor who was released from Emory University Hospital in August after recovering from the virus. Dan Frosch, Jennifer Levitz and Peter Loftus contributed to this article. Write to Miguel Bustillo at miguel.bustillo wsj.com and Ana Campoy at ana.campoy wsj.com
Thomas Eric Duncan, the 42 year old man who contracted Ebola in Liberia and later traveled to Dallas, where he was being treated, has died, hospital officials say. A statement from the company that runs Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, where Duncan was in isolation, read Duncan arrived in Dallas on Sept. 20 and became ill within days. As NPR's Michaeleen Doucleff reported last month, Duncan "first developed symptoms on Wednesday, Sept. 24, according to the CDC, and first sought care on Friday. On Sunday Sept. 28 , he was placed in isolation at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, according to the Texas Department of State Health Services." Duncan is believed to have become infected after he helped a pregnant woman with the disease into a taxi in Liberia that was to take her to a hospital. Hospital officials confirmed last week that Duncan had been sent home on Sept. 26 after an initial exam concluded he suffered from a "low grade common viral disease." The hospital said that although a nurse, working from an Ebola checklist, determined that he had recently traveled from Liberia, that information was "not communicated to the full team." Days after Duncan was put in isolation, health officials said they were tracing as many as 100 people who had either direct or secondary contact with Duncan for monitoring. They subsequently narrowed the list to about 50, with only about 10 people said to have had close contact and be at the greatest risk for the disease although health officials have repeatedly said the risk was low for all of the "contact traces." Duncan had been receiving the experimental drug brincidofovir, which The Associated Press describes as an oral medication being tested by a North Carolina company for use against several other types of viruses. Member station KERA in Dallas quotes Dr. David Lakey, commissioner of Texas Department of State Health Services, as saying
Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person to be diagnosed with Ebola in the United States, has died, the hospital that had been treating him said Wednesday. The CDC last week confirmed Duncan tested positive for Ebola after returning to the states from Liberia. And over the weekend, the hospital said Duncan had slipped from serious to critical condition. Duncan flew from Liberia to the U.S. on Sept. 19, and began showing symptoms of Ebola a few days later. Though he checked into a hospital for treatment Sept, 26, he was initially sent home before returning two days later in an ambulance. After being admitted to the hospital a second time, it took another week for Duncan to receive an experimental drug, brincidofovir, according to Duncan's family. The CDC is monitoring several people who came into contact with Duncan after he arrived in Texas, though to date none have shown signs of infection.
Ebola claimed its first victim in the U.S. on Wednesday with the death of Thomas Eric Duncan, a Liberian man who developed symptoms while visiting family in Dallas. The virus has already killed more than 3,400 people in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea, according to the Centers for Disease Control. But but the death of a patient inside a Texas hospital highlights the efforts at medical facilities in the developed world to prepare for more Ebola patients like Duncan, who may arrive from countries where infection is widespread. The U.S. plans to screen travelers arriving from West Africa at five airports dash JFK and Newark in the New York area, Dulles in Washington, D.C., O'Hare in Chicago, and Hartsfield Jackson in Atlanta, according to the New York Times. The handling of the first imported cases in Europe and the U.S. is already coming under scrutiny. The nurse in Madrid who contracted Ebola while treating a Spanish missionary was not tested or quarantined for nearly a week after she initially reported symptoms, according to Spanish media reports. And Duncan was sent home the first time he visited Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, increasing the risk that he exposed more people before he was hospitalized Sept. 28. Duncan was on a breathing tube and kidney dialysis, officials said Tuesday, and he was also receiving an experimental drug, Brincidofovir, being developed by a company called Chimerix (CMRX) to treat other viruses. The drug showed promise in a "test tube model of Ebola," CDC Director Tom Frieden said on Tuesday. It's impossible to draw any conclusions about the drug's safety or effectiveness from Duncan's case. Ebola is fatal for about half the patients who contract it, according to the World Health Organization, although death rates have varied widely in previous outbreaks. There's no proven therapy or vaccine, but basic medical care can improve the odds that infected patients will survive. "What we've learned about Ebola is how important it is to get the patient's basic care right, so that we're treating their fluid and electrolyte balance well," Frieden told reporters. "That's critically important to survival." Ten people Duncan had definite contact with, including his family, are being monitored for symptoms. Another 38 people he may have had contact with also being tracked. None had fever or other symptoms, Frieden said. People who contract the virus often develop symptoms in eight to 10 days, but the incubation period can be as long as 21 days. Duncan began to develop symptoms around Sept. 24 and was not hospitalized until Sept. 28, meaning those he could have exposed before he was quarantined must be monitored at least through about Oct. 19. And as the case in Spain shows, there's no guarantee that medical staff treating him were not at some risk of exposure after that. Doctors and nurses encountering more potential cases must be vigilant to avoid repeating the mistakes when Duncan first sought care. "Hospitals are on high alert right now because they don't want to miss anyone who presents with a travel history and symptoms consistent with Ebola," Texas Health Commissioner David Lakey told reporters Tuesday.
On 30 September 2014, CDC officials confirmed that a patient at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital had been diagnosed with Ebola. The patient was later identified as Thomas Eric Duncan of Liberia. Duncan, the first person to be diagnosed with Ebola in the United States, was reported to be in critical condition after his diagnosis was disclosed by public health officials. On the morning of 8 October 2014, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas confirmed in a statement posted to Facebook that Duncan had died of the disease Thomas Eric Duncan was 42. Relatives with whom Duncan stayed before he fell ill remained in quarantine at the time of his death. Last updated 8 October 2014
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE Thomas Eric Duncan, the Liberian national who was the first patient diagnosed with Ebola in the United States, died Wednesday at a Dallas hospital, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said. Duncan, 42, arrived in Dallas from Liberia on Sept. 20 and was admitted to Texas Health Presbyterian on Sept. 28. Two days later he was diagnosed with the deadly virus that has claimed 3,879 lives in West Africa, according to the World Health Organization. Duncan, whose condition steadily deteriorated over the past 10 days, had been heavily medicated, on dialysis and in a semi comatose state, said Saymendy Lloyd, a Washington based Liberian activist who has been acting as a spokeswoman for the family. Duncan had also been receiving some experimental anti Ebola drugs at his family's urging. "His suffering is over," said Louise Troh, Duncan's fianc e who rented the apartment where he was staying. "My family is in deep sadness and grief, but we leave him in the hands of God. Our deepest sympathies go out to his father and family in Liberia and here in America. Eric was a wonderful man who showed compassion toward all." "He fought courageously in this battle," said Wendell Watson, a hospital spokesman. "Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time." Troh, who was relocated along with her family and is being monitored daily for any symptoms of Ebola infection, thanked the people of Dallas, a church, the local Liberian community and public officials "for all the love and support they have shown" during the ordeal. "Without their help, I can't imagine how we could have endured," she said. The treatment of the family drew criticism when they were quarantined in the apartment with Duncan's contaminated belongings for six days before a hazardous materials crew arrived to bag up and sanitize the materials. Duncan's 19 year old son, Eric Duncan, who has not seen his father since he fled Liberia at the age of 3 to avoid a civil war, had flown to Dallas Monday to visit his father. But Duncan died before their scheduled meeting Wednesday via a closed circuit video, Lloyd said. Duncan, in a few lucid moments recently, had told a nurse he was excited about reuniting with his son, who plays football at an American university, after 16 years. 'I'm so proud of him, I can't wait to see him,'" Duncan told the nurse, according to Lloyd. News of Duncan's death sent shock waves through members of the Liberian community in the Dallas Fort Worth area, who were holding prayer vigils for his recovery. "Not just shock but fear," said Bishop Nathan Kortu, a local Liberian leader. "Right now everybody is really afraid. For this man to be in an advanced country where we thought he was in a safety zone, for him to perish like this is a very big concern for the Liberian community right now." Liberian funerals are typically elaborate affairs, with an all night viewing of the body followed by funeral services and burial, followed by a large celebration laden with traditional African dishes and singing, he said. He expects none of that to take place with Duncan, he said, as health officials will likely dispose of the body quickly. "Liberians like to say good bye to loved ones who have died," Kortu said. "It's amazing that none of this will happen." There are no proven treatments or vaccines for Ebola, but several Ebola patients treated in the USA and elsewhere have received experimental, unproven drugs for compassionate use. The odds were stacked against Duncan, doctors say. About 70 of Ebola patients in West Africa are dying of the virus, including 60 of those who get to the hospital, said Robert Murphy, a professor of medicine and biomedical engineering at Northwestern University in Chicago. His condition was complicated by a two day delay in treatment after a Dallas hospital initially sent him home without realizing he was infected with Ebola. Such delays can be deadly with infectious diseases, Murphy said. "The quicker we can get patients into care, the better their odds for survival. He may have been too far gone for even our best supportive care," said Amesh Adalja, infectious disease specialist at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. Three Americans treated for Ebola Kent Brantly, Nancy Writebol and Richard Sacra were evacuated from Liberia to top flight American hospitals with specialized biocontainment units developed to treat Ebola and other dangerous diseases. All three survived. "We've gotten lucky with the airlifted cases that they were able to get good supportive care," Adalja said. But doctors may have had a more difficult time with Duncan. "We don't know his past medical history," such as whether he had any serious chronic diseases in addition to Ebola, Adalja said. Duncan contracted the disease just before leaving Liberia in mid September when he helped helped carry a 19 year old woman, who was later diagnosed with Ebola, into a taxi to go to the hospital after her family was unable to get an ambulance. Williams, who was seven months pregnant, was turned away at the hospital because of lack of space in the Ebola ward. She returned home that evening, hours before she died. At the airport in Liberia when he was departing, Duncan signed a form saying that he had not had contact with any person infected by the virus. It is not clear whether he knew of Williams' diagnosis, which initially appeared to be pregnancy related, at the time he left the country. Officials in Liberia said Duncan showed no symptoms when he boarded the plane and he was therefore not contagious. Ebola can only be spread through the bodily fluids of people showing signs of the disease. Unlike an infection such as tuberculosis, which primarily attacks the lung, Ebola affects many organs of the body at once, said Adalja. Massive diarrhea and vomiting can cause dehydration and disrupt the normal balance of electrolytes, such as potassium, causing heart rhythm problems, he said. The virus can cause bleeding by making tiny holes in blood vessels and by harming platelets, a type of blood cell that normally helps the blood to clot. Ebola can cause kidney and liver failure, and prompt the immune system to overreact, further stressing the body. Many patients with Ebola die of septic shock, or a bloodstream infection, Adalja said. As the first case of a person diagnosed with the disease in the United States, Duncan's hospitalization drew national attention to the deadly disease and efforts to keep it from spreading. After Duncan's condition was diagnosed, city and state health officials moved quickly to track down as many as 80 to 100 people with whom he had contact in Dallas before he was hospitalized. The case also drew attention to the screening procedures for travelers from West Africa entering the United States, prompting a tightening of regulations. In Washington, White House spokesman Josh Earnest on Wednesday confirmed a new policy that travelers from West Africa will get fever screening for Ebola at five U.S. airports. These airports are the destination of 94 of passengers from West Africa, he said. Contributing Jason Whitely, who reports for WFAA TV in Dallas CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story http www.wcnc.com story news nation now 2014 10 08 ebola patient in dallas hospital dies 16910793
Thomas Eric Duncan, who was the first patient to be diagnosed with Ebola in the US The first person to be diagnosed with Ebola on US soil on US soil has died as America announced it would start testing air passengers arriving from West Africa for signs of the virus. Thomas Eric Duncan, 42, died on the day he was hoping to be reunited over a video monitor with his 19 year old son, who he had not seen for 16 years. He apologised for having put his fiancee, who he called the "love of my life" in danger. Doctors at Texas Presbyterian Health Hospital in Dallas said he had "fought courageously" against the virus before succumbing. Duncan, who was Liberian, arrived in the US from his home country on Sept 20. Hours before he died US officials disclosed they are planning to monitor passengers arriving from West Africa at five major airports. The "enhanced screening measures" will begin as early as this weekend at international airports in Washington DC, Chicago, Atlanta, and two in New York. Duncan had arrived in Washington DC from Liberia on his way to Dallas. Homeland Security agents will observe visitors and take their temperatures to see if they have feverish symptoms that could be Ebola. Passengers will also be given questionnaires to fill out which are intended to assess if they pose a risk. Facts sheets will also be distributed telling them to take their temperature twice a day and to call a doctor if they become sick within 21 days, the incubation period for the virus. Before Duncan died family members had watched him on a monitor as his condition deteriorated in an isolation unit. During their final visit on Tuesday, accompanied by Rev Jesse Jackson, it became too distressing. His nephew Josephus Weeks said "What we saw was very painful. It didn't look good." The patient's son, Karsiah Duncan, 19, a high school American football quarterback in the US, had arrived in Dallas and was hoping to speak to him on the day he died. Karsiah Duncan had left Liberia in 1998 with his mother Louise Troh to avoid civil war. Thomas Eric Duncan told a friend before he died that he had been looking forward to seeing his son. He said "I'm so proud of him, I can't wait to see him." The victim had been staying with Miss Troh in Dallas and she is now quarantined along with her 13 year old son and two grown up nephews who also had contact with Duncan. The family has been moved from their apartment, which has been disinfected, to a residence inside a gated community. In a statement issued from her quarantined home Miss Troh said "His suffering is over now. His family is in deep sorrow and grief but we leave him in the hands of God. Eric was a wonderul man who showed comappssion toward all. "I trust a thorough examination will take place regarding all aspects of his care. "I am now dealing with the sorrow and anger that his son was not able to see him before he died. This will take some time but, in the end, I believe in a merciful God." A total of 48 people in Dallas who came into contact with Duncan are having their temperatures monitored twice a day. Tight precautions are being taken with the disposal of Duncan's body. It will not be washed before being placed in a leak proof plastic shroud which will be inserted inside a second bag, which will then be disinfected. Workers at the mortuary will wear protective clothing and the remains will be either cremated or put inside a hermetically sealed casket. Duncan was initially treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas, they sent him home with antibiotics a decision that may have potentially endangered his life and exposed scores of Dallas residents to Ebola symptoms. On October 4, he begun treatment with an experimental drug called brincidofovir. The drug has already been tested in up to 900 patients in late stage FDA trials, but for viruses like cytomegalovirus and adenovirus not for Ebola. The serum which was successfully used on two American missionaries, Dr Kent Brantly and Dr Nancy Writebol, was not available as supplies have run out. Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital spokesman Wendell Watson said "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7.51 am. "Mr Duncan succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola. He fought courageously in this battle. Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time. Dr David Lakey, Commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, said "The past week has been an enormous test of our health system but for one family it has been far more personal. "Today they lost a dear member of their family. They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts. "The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways. We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat."
UPDATED Monday, October 6, 2014 at 2 37 p.m. E.T. An experimental drug treatment is being provided to the Liberian national who was infected with the Ebola virus, the hospital where he is being treated in Texas announced on Monday. According to the Dallas Morning News The drug is an investigational medication, brincidofovir. Duncan remains in critical but stable condition, according to Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas. Chimerix, Inc., a biopharmaceutical company today announced that brincidofovir has been provided for potential use in patients with Ebola Virus Disease.... "We are hopeful that brincidofovir may offer a potential treatment for Ebola Virus Disease during this outbreak," Dr. M. Michelle Berrey, the president and chief executive officer of Chimerix, said in a statement released Monday by the company. EARLIER Thomas Eric Duncan (pictured), the man who contracted the deadly Ebola virus after traveling from Liberia to the United States, is now fighting for his life, with his condition escalating from serious to critical in a Dallas hospital. According to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, despite his condition, Duncan will not be receiving the experimental drugs used to treat the raging virus, reports ABC News. SEE ALSO Crew Decontaminates Ebola Patient's Apt Duncan, who is currently at the Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, is not being given the experimental drug ZMapp because doctors fear it may actually worsen his already grave condition. Still, those close to Duncan question the doctors' decision to not give Duncan any drugs, especially in his condition, "I don't understand why he is not getting the ZMapp," Joe Weeks, who lives with Duncan's sister Mai, told ABC News. ZMapp, an experiment therapy based on engineered antibodies that were successful in monkey clinical trials, quite possibly helped to save the lives of American aid workers Dr. Kent Brantly, Dr. Rick Sacra and Nancy Writebol who were all brought back to these shores for treatment. Brantly also received a unit of blood from an Ebola survivor, which now reportedly makes him immune to that particular strain of Ebola. Reportedly ZMapp is difficult to produce and is in the process of being produced again and according to Anthony Fauci, head of the head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, who appeared on Sunday's CBS's "Face The Nation" the drug, "should be ready in a month and a half to two months." The Monrovian born Duncan is a man in his mid 40s who had direct contact with someone who was stricken with Ebola on September 15th, just four days before he left Liberia to fly to the United States. On his first trip to America, he came to visit his sister in Texas. When he arrived in the States, he began feeling sick and went to a Dallas hospital emergency room only to be sent home with antibiotics. Two days later, he returned to the hospital with worse symptoms and was finally diagnosed with Ebola. Last Friday, a hazardous materials team of workers decontaminated the Dallas apartment, where Duncan was staying when he feel ill. The materials were sealed in industrial barrels that were to be stored in trucks until they can be hauled away for permanent disposal. The family who lived there, Duncan's girlfriend, one of her two children and two young men, were moved to a private home in a gated community, where they are being monitored none of the four have yet to report any symptoms. Health officials have also been keeping a watchful eye on the reported 50 people who may have come in contact with Duncan, and they, along with the four people at the residence where Duncan was staying, will all be observed for any signs of the virus over a period of 21 days. Meanwhile, Liberian officials allege that Duncan lied about his history with Ebola on an airport health questionnaire that is handed out to passengers to weed out possible carriers of the virus. Therefore, Duncan will likely be subject to charges if he returns to his country, according to the New York Times.
Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person diagnosed with Ebola in the U.S., has died. WSJ's Jeannette Neumann and Dr. Nancy Simpkins discuss on Lunch Break with Tanya Rivero. Photo AP DALLAS The Liberian man who was diagnosed with Ebola in Dallas, the first case of the deadly disease in the U.S., died on Wednesday morning, the hospital treating him announced. Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas said Thomas Eric Duncan died at 7 51 a.m. Wednesday. He had been in critical condition for days, and hospital officials a day earlier had said he was receiving life support assistance from a ventilator and dialysis machine. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 a.m.," the hospital said in a statement, adding, "He fought courageously in this battle. Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time." Mr. Duncan had also been receiving an experimental drug made by Chimerix Inc., CMRX 0.24 Chimerix Inc. U.S. Nasdaq 33.15 0.08 0.24 Oct. 8, 2014 3 35 pm Volume (Delayed 15m) 12.61M P E Ratio N A Market Cap 1.19 Billion Dividend Yield N A Rev. per Employee 67,115 10 08 14 Chimerix Shares Fall Sharply A... 10 08 14 Dallas Ebola Patient Dies 10 06 14 U.S. Weighing Additional Passe... More quote details and news " CMRX in Your Value Your Change Short position brincidofovir, to treat his Ebola, hospital officials said. But the all out effort to save his life still failed, underscoring the lethality of a disease outbreak that has killed more than 3,000 people in Africa, according to the World Health Organization. Larry Pickering, senior adviser to the director of a division of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said it was premature to draw any conclusions about the effect of the experimental Chimerix drug on the Dallas patient. "One patient, one drug, you can't draw any conclusions from it," Dr. Pickering said at an infectious disease conference in Philadelphia. "We have a long way to go before we can clarify what drugs will be effective for Ebola virus." Related Articles U.S. to Check Travelers' Temperatures Britain to Step Up Ebola Fight in West Africa Chimerix Shares Fall After Patient Dies New York Hospitals Prep for Ebola Doctor Ebola Infection in Spain Might Be Human Error Patient's Dog Euthanized Health Care Workers Face Ebola Risks Five Things About Ebola in the U.S. Ebola is a highly contagious virus, but only if you come into contact with certain bodily fluids of those infected. What do scientists know about how it's transmitted? WSJ's Jason Bellini has TheShortAnswer. Louise Troh, the woman Mr. Duncan was visiting in the U.S., with whom he shared a son and had been staying in a Dallas apartment after falling ill, said in a statement that Mr. Duncan's friends and family would be "grieving for a long time" over his loss. "His suffering is over. My family is in deep sadness and grief, but we leave him in the hands of God," Ms. Troh said in the statement. "Our deepest sympathies go out to his father and family in Liberia and here in America. Eric was a wonderful man who showed compassion toward all." She added that friends and family members hoped the circumstances surrounding his death, including an early delay in his Ebola diagnosis, would be investigated. "I trust a thorough examination will take place regarding all aspects of his care," the statement said. "I am now dealing with the sorrow and anger that his son was not able to see him before he died." Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins, the area's top elected official, mourned Mr. Duncan's passing. "My thoughts are with the family and friends of Thomas Eric Duncan at this time, especially his fianc e Louise, their son Karsiah and all those who loved him," Judge Jenkins said. "We are also thinking of the dedicated hospital staff who assisted Mr. Duncan daily while he fought this terrible disease." When told of the news, Joe Joe Jallah, Ms. Troh's ex husband, who visited Mr. Duncan several times at the Dallas apartment where he was staying, said, "Oh, my god." More Bodily fluids present an infection risk to medical workers treating patients with ebola. What gear do they wear? WSJ's Jason Bellini has TheShortAnswer. Mr. Jallah had been at the apartment when his daughter, Youngor, a nurse's aide, decided to call 911 so that Mr. Duncan could get help. He said he was deeply saddened to hear about Mr. Duncan's death and worried about his own welfare and that of his daughter. "I'm sad, and I'm sorry," he said, sounding shaken. Back in the muddy neighborhood on the outskirts of Monrovia, where Mr. Duncan lived under a tin roof in a one bedroom home, the woman next door, Irene Seydou, learned of the news in a call with a reporter. "Dear God," she said into the phone. "He was a nice man!" Mr. Duncan likely contracted the disease helping carry a pregnant teenager to an Ebola clinic last month, Ms. Seydou and other neighbors have recalled. "He was just helping carrying her to the hospital," she said. "Now, he's not here." David Lakey, the commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, said public health officials had faced "an enormous test" in responding to Mr. Duncan's case, but that "for one family, it has been far more personal." "The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways," Dr. Lakey said in a statement. "We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat." Doctors at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas initially sent Mr. Duncan home with a prescription for antibiotics after he first arrived at the hospital's emergency room on the night of Sept. 25, complaining that he felt ill. He was only admitted to the hospital three days later, on Sept. 28, when he returned via ambulance after his symptoms had worsened. He was formally diagnosed with Ebola two days after that, on Sept. 30. By that time, Mr. Duncan had come into close contact with emergency medical technicians, and five children he had been around had attended Dallas public schools last Monday and Tuesday. One child also attended a middle school last Wednesday, school officials have said. The hospital released a statement last Thursday evening saying that an electronics record glitch had prevented physicians from seeing the information nurses collected from Mr. Duncan that he had recently arrived from Africa. But it reversed its position last Friday evening, saying that Mr. Duncan's travel history was available to physicians as well as nurses in its electronic health records. Mr. Duncan's case has served as a forceful reminder to U.S. hospitals and public health officials that Ebola is a threat even in countries with advanced health care systems. It has also been a wake up call for residents in his home in faraway Liberia, where for weeks residents refused to believe that the disease sweeping from home to home was Ebola. Neighbors in Liberia insisted both to other neighbors and to government officials that ill loved ones had low blood pressure, or had been in a car wreck. Then, Mr. Duncan, thousands of miles west, checked into a Dallas hospital, sending a scrum of foreign journalists and health officials into the area where he lived. The scene brought children to tears, and saw adults, visibly worried, gathering around to collect gloves and disinfectant tablets from health workers. Patient's Timeline Sept. 19 Departs Liberia Sept. 20 Arrives in U.S. Sept. 24 Shows first symptoms of Ebola Sept. 26 First seeks care Sept. 28 Admitted to hospital Source CDC Now, Mr. Duncan's neighbors have accepted that Ebola is real, deadly, and present in their crowded community. "Most of them are washing their hands continuously," said Andrew Babble, an official with Liberia's ministry of health, who dropped by on Monday to investigate whether there had been any new cases. There hadn't. "They're doing what they supposed to do," he said. "There's progress." Meanwhile another person being treated for Ebola in the U.S., Ashoka Mukpo, a freelance American journalist diagnosed with the disease while working in Liberia, was in stable condition at the Nebraska Medical Center on Wednesday, said spokesman Taylor Wilson. "He has a serious disease but he is stable right now," Mr. Wilson said. Mr. Mukpo, the fifth American to have contracted the virus while working in West Africa, is also being treated with brincidofovir. He was expected to be given a blood transfusion from Kent Brantly, an American missionary doctor who was released from Emory University Hospital in August after recovering from the virus. Dan Frosch, Jennifer Levitz and Peter Loftus contributed to this article. Write to Miguel Bustillo at miguel.bustillo wsj.com, Ana Campoy at ana.campoy wsj.com and Drew Hinshaw at drew.hinshaw wsj.com
The family of Thomas Eric Duncan, the Liberian man who died Tuesday of Ebola after arriving in Dallas late last month, said they are filled with "sorrow and anger" and want an impartial probe into "all aspects of his care" after President Obama last week admitted "missteps" in the US response. Mr. Duncan arrived in the US on Sept. 20 from Liberia, the West African nation first colonized by freed US slaves that is at the center of the current outbreak. He went to the hospital on Sept. 25, but was sent home on Sept. 26 with a standard antibiotic cure. He returned on Sept. 28 by ambulance after becoming extremely ill. He was the first person to be diagnosed with Ebola outside of Africa. Duncan, a civil war survivor in his 40s, quickly became the face of Ebola in the US, as anxiety coursed through Dallas and dozens of other people who had direct and indirect contact with Duncan were either quarantined or closely monitored. Authorities say this is a critical week for the national Ebola response as those people, including his closest friends and family, remain within the 21 day incubation period. None have fallen ill so far. And while doctors desperately tried to save Duncan's life, his death stands in stark contrast to the plight of several Americans, including aid workers and doctors, who have survived the illness after being treated in the US. More than 7,000 people have been diagnosed in the largest ever such outbreak in West Africa, and about half of those victims died. The past week was "an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal today they lost a dear member of their family," said Dr. David Lakey, the commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, in a statement. "We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat." An ethical debate has emerged over a decision that some say was too long delayed to try an experimental drug on Duncan, especially as he was given a different serum than the one used on the American victims who survived. The makers of ZMapp, the experimental Ebola antibody serum that may have helped two US aid workers survive the illness, said it had run out of the drug and that it will take months to make more. Instead, doctors gave Duncan an antiviral drug used for other illnesses, but which had never been tested for Ebola in humans. Medical experts say counterproductive side effects likely kept doctors from giving Duncan the drug earlier, only administering it after it became clear his condition was worsening. The family's concerns about Duncan's care, friends say, mostly center on why Duncan was sent home at first, especially given conflicting reports from the hospital about the extent to which they were aware that Duncan had traveled from the Ebola "hot zone." "The family wants to better understand the process of how Duncan's original release from the hospital happened," Jay Pritchard, a church friend who is helping them with public relations, tells the Monitor. Authorities say Duncan failed to disclose on travel permission forms that he had had contact with an Ebola stricken pregnant woman in the days before his departure from Liberia to the United States. Meanwhile, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, where he was treated, has changed its explanation several times, acknowledging that officials there did know on his first visit that he had come from West Africa. Seeing how sick he was, his family at one point called the Centers for Disease Control before putting Duncan on an ambulance. Duncan's case may become important going forward, because of the questions it has raised about rationing and who gets what experimental drug and the possible negative impact of such "compassionate use" waivers that the FDA has to sign off on. Indeed, " Duncan's treatment and death emphasizes the need to rapidly reconsider the decisions to use untested experimental or investigational agents in patients in an unregulated and seemingly random way," says Philip Rosoff, a Duke University medical ethicist and author of "Rationing Is Not A Four Letter Word." The problem "is that we now don't know in this case whether the medication Duncan was given was ineffective or too late or he wasn't given enough, or whether the drug actually contributed to his death." "Unless we do thorough clinical trials, as difficult as that may be to accept under the conditions of this seemingly out of control epidemic, we're not going to find out how to treat the patients of tomorrow, much less the patients of today," Dr. Rosoff says. At the same time, limited quantities of experimental drugs and subsequent rationing could become part of a broader pattern in the global Ebola response. Ethically, Rosoff says, it's appropriate in a disease outbreak to treat medical workers and other frontline response staff first, given that they're in the best position to help stop the spread. But after that first determination on who gets what experimental drug, the ethical situation gets more complicated, especially given that "desperate people are willing to take desperate measures," as he told Voice of America. "Some people think that a lottery or coin toss mechanism is the fairest," he said in a recent interview with the news service. "Other people think first in line first come, first served might be the fairest. The problem with first come, first serve is that tends to privilege people who can get there first, and that's sometimes people who have access to information or transportation."
Receive the latest national international updates in your inbox The Centers for Disease Control will hold a press conference to update the Ebola investigation at 3 00 p.m. Watch live in the player above. Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person diagnosed with Ebola in the United States, died Wednesday in a Dallas hospital after a weeks long battle that tested public health officials' defenses against the deadly virus and triggered a scramble to contain it. UpdatedU.S. Orders Agents to Monitor Travelers for Ebola at 5 Airports Duncan died Wednesday morning at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, two weeks after he first fell ill and more than three weeks after he contracted the disease Ein his home country of Liberia. He is believed to have been infected when he helped carry a dying woman to the hospital there. "His suffering is over. My family is in deep sadness and grief, but we leave him in the hands of God," his girlfriend Louise Troh, whom he had reportedly come to the U.S. to marry, said in a statement. "Eric was a wonderful man who showed compassion toward all." Ebola Patient's Son Speaks Out For first time, the son of Dallas Ebola patient Thomas Eric Duncan is speaking out publicly since his father was diagnosed with the Ebola virus a week ago. The hospital said he died at 7 51 a.m. local time Wednesday morning of the "insidious" illness. "He fought courageously in this battle," it said. Duncan traveled from his hometown of Monrovia, Liberia, on Sept. 19, days after neighbors said he helped take a woman dying of Ebola to the hospital. His brother in Phoenix, Arizona, told The Associated Press that Duncan headed to Dallas to be with his girlfriend and child. He said he did not believe Duncan knew he had Ebola before he left Liberia. UpdatedSon of Dallas Ebola Patient Speaks Out for the First Time Duncan went to the hospital on Sept. 25 with a temperature of 100.1 degrees. He told the nurse he had recently traveled to Dallas from Liberia, the hospital acknowledged, but he was sent home with antibiotics when he would have been most contagious. He returned to the hospital in an ambulance days later, on Sept. 28, and was diagnosed with Ebola. Duncan had been in isolation and was treated with an experimental drug. Four people living in an apartment where he was staying when he fell ill, including a woman with whom he has a son and was reportedly planning to marry, are being monitored for signs of the virus as part of a 21 day court ordered quarantine. Hospital Dallas Ebola Patient Dies Thomas Eric Duncan, the first patient diagnosed with Ebola virus in the U.S., dies Wednesday morning, according to Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas. Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins, a top local official responsible for the county's disaster and emergency preparedness operations, said in a statement that his thoughts are with "the family and friends of Thomas Eric Duncan at this time, especially his fianc e Louise, their son Karsiah and all those who loved him." "We are also thinking of the dedicated hospital staff who assisted Mr. Duncan daily while he fought this terrible disease," he said. "We offer prayers of comfort and peace to everyone impacted by his passing." "Contact Tracing" Explained How to Stop Ebola From Spreading While many people were focused on the medical aspect of this case, Texas Department of State Health Services Commissioner Dr. David Lakey acknowledged the family's personal battle. "They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts," Lakey said. VideoWhat You Need to Know How the Ebola Virus Is Spread What Happens Next The Centers for Disease Control has guidance for how to safely handle the remains of someone who dies as a result of Ebola. The body of someone who died of Ebola remains dangerous. The virus can live in bodily fluids and tissue so long as they stay wet and at room temperature. Ebola in Dallas What We Know About the 1st U.S. Case Any hospital employees who handle the body of someone who died of Ebola must wear personal protective equipment, including a scrub suit, cap, gown over the suit, eye protection, face mask and more. They must remove their protective equipment in the prescribed manner and wash their hands very carefully. Guidelines state that the body must be wrapped in multiple leak proof plastic bags and disinfected. The body must be cremated or immediately buried in a sealed casket. Mortuary personnel must take the same precautions as hospital personnel. "We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat," Lakey said.
DALLAS Ebola patient Thomas Eric Duncan told his fiancee the day he was diagnosed last week that he regrets exposing her to the deadly virus and had he known he was carrying Ebola, he would have "preferred to stay in Liberia and died than bring this to you," a family friend said. "He apologized to Louise the day they told him what he had," said Saymendy Lloyd, a close friend of Louise Troh, the fiancee of Duncan, who is in critical condition and no longer responsive. "He told her, 'I'm so sorry all of this is happening. . . . I would not put the love of my life in danger.' " Family members gathered in Dallas and were able to see Duncan on Monday at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital via a laptop camera in his hospital room. "He is not responsive at all. They said he was drugged and they put him in deep sleep," said Lloyd, who was with the family. She said the family members were saddened by the sight of Duncan. Lloyd said this was the first time Duncan's mother, who lives in North Carolina, saw her son since he came to the United States. "She has not seen him for 12 years, and the first time she saw him was through a monitor," said Lloyd. "She was very, very emotional. She told him to be strong, that she is praying for him, that she loves him and God is able to do all things." Troh, who is in mandated isolation in Dallas with her 13 year old son and two other people, spoke by phone to Lloyd. Duncan and Troh's 19 year old son, Eric Karsiah Duncan, tried to visit his father at the hospital Tuesday evening. Speaking later at a news conference at Wilshire Baptist Church, the Angelo State University student thanked his mother's church members. "I'm praying for my family to be okay and my dad makes it out safely," said Eric Duncan, who had not seen his father since he was 3 in Liberia. "I hope they find a cure for it." As Thomas Duncan fights for his life, Texas health officials are bracing for a critical week in Dallas, where they are watching for any signs that as many as 48 people who had contact with Duncan may develop symptoms of Ebola. Health officials say the incubation period for the disease is 21 days, but it could appear eight to 10 days after exposure. Duncan began showing symptoms Sept. 24, when he first sought medical treatment at Texas Presbyterian, three blocks from the home of Troh. Duncan was sent home but was taken back to the hospital by ambulance Sept. 28. Two days later, last Tuesday, a blood test confirmed that he had Ebola. Health officials say the "10 day threshold" for the disease will fall within the next few days. "This is a critical week. We need to be prepared in Dallas for what could happen if family members become ill," said David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas Department of Health Services. "We are doing contingency planning and praying for what if. I have been concentrating on what we need to do now to protect Dallas." None of the 10 "high risk" people including four people who lived in the apartment where Duncan stayed and six health care workers have developed symptoms, health officials said. Troh, who was moved to an undisclosed location with the three people who were in the apartment with Duncan, is still well, family members say. On Sunday, members of the Liberian community association were able to take her traditional Liberian food, including jollof rice, foo foo, cassava leaves and plantains. "She called me, 'I'm eating some traditional Liberian food,' " Lloyd said. "She was very happy about that." Health officials say they are continuing to watch 38 other people who had "possible contact" with Duncan and were considered to be at lower risk. Twice a day, health officials are checking the temperature of the 48 people of whom six are in mandated isolation. "They receive one call a day 1 8 to ask for a temperature reading 3 8 and one visit per day," said Sana Sayed, a spokeswoman for the city of Dallas. "A health worker makes a physical contact with the 48 people being monitored every single day, seeing them and checking their temperature." Lakey would not discuss why hospital protocols failed to detect Duncan the first time he visited Texas Health Presbyterian with a 101.1 fever, complaining of abdominal pains. The hospital's decision to send him home put other people at risk. "A lot of evaluations will take place to find out what happened on the first presentation to find out why wasn't a diagnosis made," Lakey said. Dallas County Commissioner John Wiley Price criticized the hospital for failing to heed warnings sent in July about what protocols hospitals should follow to treat infectious diseases. "I said at the outset, Presbyterian is a boutique hospital next to a little Ellis Island," Price said, referring to the neighborhood where many residents are immigrants. "If you don't have insurance, you're not going to get treated. That's the elephant in the room." Texas Health Resources, the hospital network that includes Texas Health Presbyterian, responded to criticism Tuesday by saying, "He was treated the way any other patient would have been treated, regardless of nationality or ability to pay for care. We have a long history of treating a multicultural community in this area." Thomas Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said that the agency was exploring ways to increase the screening of passengers on both sides of the Atlantic. "We're working very intensively on the screening process," Frieden said in a conference call with reporters Tuesday. "We're looking at that entire process to see what more can be done." While he promised that "additional steps" were coming, Frieden did not elaborate on what that would include. Sen. Charles E. Schumer (D N.Y.) said in an interview Tuesday that Frieden told him that the plan is to have "tougher types of screening on U.S. soil." Still, Frieden said the CDC has had teams on the ground working to strengthen the screening of passengers leaving West Africa. The screening has included taking temperatures, keeping an eye out for other symptoms and having travelers fill out questionnaires. He said the CDC methods have been used to screen more than 36,000 people over two months. And of those travelers, a small portion of whom were coming to the United States, only 77 people had a fever or other symptoms that caused them to be taken out of line, he said. "As far as we know, none of those 77 people had Ebola," Frieden noted. Of course, these methods are not perfect, as was made clear when Duncan filled out a questionnaire, had his temperature taken by a person trained by the CDC and boarded multiple flights on his way to Dallas. President Barack Obama's promise of stepped up screening for Ebola at U.S. airports that handle international flights will fall on the shoulders of the Customs and Border Protection officers who greet passengers arriving from abroad. Though they often seem preoccupied with scrutinizing passports and luggage, customs officers are trained to detect signs of illness, and they routinely do just that, officials said. "CBP personnel review all travelers entering the United States for general overt signs of illnesses," the agency said in a statement. In addition to visual observations, CBP officers question passengers about their health and are instructed to alert the CDC if a passenger appears to be seriously ill. If a person is believed to have "a possible communicable disease," they are isolated while the CDC and local authorities conduct the evaluation. Federal law requires pilots to radio ahead if a passenger dies or falls ill with certain symptoms. "If somebody comes in on a flight that has a fever or any one of those triggers, CDC can insert themselves at any point in the process," said Rob Yingling, spokesman for the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, which runs Dulles International and Reagan National airports. "They can say 1 8 to the pilot 3 8 , 'Tell us more about this case,' or they can actually physically go to the plane." The CDC maintains an office at Dulles and other major airports that handle international flights. Meanwhile, up to 4,000 service members are expected to head to West African countries ravaged by the Ebola epidemic. They will be monitored several times a day and, if any of them contract Ebola, they will be flown back to the United States aboard a specially designed plane for treatment. Among the tasks laid out for the military is the construction of 17 treatment centers for people with the disease. This will take until the middle of next month, according to Gen. David Rodriguez, chief of U.S. Africa Command.
Thomas Eric Duncan, the first Ebola patient diagnosed in the United States, died Wednesday more than a week after he was hospitalized in Dallas, officials announced. Separately, Texas officials announced there was a second patient with possible symptoms of Ebola. A spokesman for the city of Frisco, Texas, said emergency crews had picked up someone "exhibiting signs and symptoms of Ebola" and was transporting the patient to the hospital. "The patient claims to have had contact with the Dallas 'patient zero,'" said Dana Baird, communications director for the city. "Patient zero" is Duncan. Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas confirmed that the second patient had been "admitted to the Emergency Room after reporting possible exposure to the Ebola virus. Right now, there are more questions than answers about this case." But the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Tom Frieden, called for perspective in dealing with reports that another person in Texas might have Ebola. So far, he said, the person "had neither definite contact with Duncan nor definite symptoms" of Ebola. Officials will continue to investigate the case, Frieden said. In Dallas, Duncan, 42, had become a human face of Ebola for many Americans who were unaware of the disease that has ravaged parts of West Africa and killed more than 3,400 people there. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 a.m.," Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas said in a statement. Duncan will be cremated to kill any virus in the body so the remains can be returned to the family, the state announced. Duncan left Liberia on Sept. 19 to visit Louise Troh, with whom he was reconciling and planned to marry in Dallas. They were planning to live as a family with their son. "His suffering is over," Troh said in a statement. "My family is in deep sadness and grief, but we leave him in the hands of God. Our deepest sympathies go out to his father and family in Liberia and here in America." "I trust a thorough examination will take place regarding all aspects of his care," she said. "I am now dealing with the sorrow and anger that his son was not able to see him before he died. This will take some time, but in the end, I believe in a merciful God." Duncan told his fiancee the day he was diagnosed last week that he regretted exposing her to the deadly virus and had he known he was carrying Ebola, he would have "preferred to stay in Liberia and died than bring this to you," Saymendy Lloyd, a close friend of Troh said on Wednesday. "He apologized to Louise the day they told him what he had," Lloyd said. "He told her, 'I'm so sorry all of this is happening. ...I would not put the love of my life in danger.'" Family members gathered in Dallas and were able to see Duncan on Monday via a laptop camera in his hospital room, she said. "He is not responsive at all. They said he was drugged and they put him in deep sleep," said Lloyd, who said she was driving on Wednesday to see Duncan's son, Karsiah Duncan, 19, a student at Angelo State University. Lloyd said Tuesday's hospital visit was the first time Duncan's mother, who lives in North Carolina, saw her son since he entered the United States last month. "When we saw him, they only showed us his head, with all the tubes in his mouth," Lloyd said. "They told us yesterday that his condition was improving, that his liver was functioning better, they gave us all this good news," she said of doctors, "This is not the result we were hoping for. His son is very upset right now." Karsiah Duncan was 3 years old when he last saw his father. "We're just trying right now to adjust to the situation. It's very emotional," Lloyd said, "We just trying to grasp the fact that he's dead." She said Louise called her Wednesday morning with the news of Duncan's death. "She has been stronger than I am. She called me this morning to hold me up," Lloyd said. "She just said, 'I'm finished, I'm finished,' that's all she could say. She was crying. She's tired. She can't believe this. "In our culture, when you say 'I'm finished' it can mean I have no more questions, I have no more complaints, I can't question God,'" Lloyd said. Troh along with nine others constitute the high risk group of contacts because Duncan stayed in her apartment, less than a mile from the hospital where he was treated and released with antibiotics on Sept. 25. He was rushed back to the hospital on Sept. 28 and formally diagnosed with Ebola days later. In the hospital, Duncan had been treated with the experimental antiviral drug, brincidofovir. Officials have been monitoring Duncan's immediate and secondary contacts, but none of the 48 people have developed any symptoms, officials said. "The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal. Today they lost a dear member of their family," stated Texas health commissioner David Lakey. "They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts. The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways." Five of the high risk contacts are children who attended classes before the monitoring began. Parents have been wrestling with whether to allow children to attend classes. "The Dallas Independent School District is saddened to learn of Mr. Thomas Duncan's passing and we extend our sympathy to his family and loved ones," the district said in statement. "Today our thoughts are with our students who knew Mr. Duncan." The district noted that none of the five pupils who are in the contact group "show any signs or symptoms of the virus and therefore are not contagious." Duncan met Troh when they lived next door to each other in a refugee camp in Ivory Coast, said Wilfred Smallwood, a former Liberian journalist who said he grew up with Duncan. Duncan was the son of an American educated Liberian engineer who worked for an American mining company. As a boy, Duncan the youngest of seven siblings was fascinated by airplanes and wanted to be a pilot. The entire family applied to resettle in the U.S., Smallwood said. A sister was the first to be accepted, settling in Baltimore and working as a nurse to support the family.
Pastor George Mason speaks to the media about the death of Thomas Eric Duncan from Ebola during a press conference at Wilshire Baptist Church in Dallas, Texas Oct. 8, 2014. The first person diagnosed with Ebola in the United States, Duncan died Wednesday morning, a hospital spokesman said. Reuters The body of Thomas Eric Duncan, the first Ebola patient to have died in the U.S., will be cremated per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's guidelines, Texas health officials said Wednesday. Duncan's remains, as with any Ebola patient, are cause for concern because the virus can live in bodily fluids as long as they remain wet and at room temperature, NBC News reported. The CDC has strict recommendations for handling the remains of someone killed by Ebola, including avoiding an autopsy. The health agency says the body should be cremated and sealed in an airtight casket. Duncan died Wednesday morning at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas. He arrived in the U.S. from Liberia on Sept. 20 and began showing symptoms of Ebola four days later. He sought care on Sept. 26, but was turned away even after he informed the hospital staff that he had recently been in Liberia. The hospital later blamed the misunderstanding on a computer glitch. Duncan returned to the hospital two days later when his symptoms worsened. As many as 80 people may have come into contact with Duncan or his family before he was hospitalized, including several school aged kids. Four of Duncan's family members were quarantined and monitored for infection. Duncan had come to the U.S. to marry his girlfriend, who was in "great shock" and "despair" after learning of Duncan's death. "It was a painful and difficult time for her," a local pastor in Dallas told reporters, according to CNN. "She expressed that in her own personal way, with great emotion." Duncan's family will seek answers from the hospital over his death, including why the patient was not screened for Ebola during his initial visit and why he was not given blood containing antibodies like some other Ebola patients.
NIAID Flickr Thomas Eric Duncan, the first patient to be diagnosed with Ebola in the U.S., died this morning, a spokesman for the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas said in a statement. "He fought courageously in this battle," the statement, from public relations director Wendell Watson, said. "Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time." Duncan, who is Liberian, likely contracted Ebola when he helped carry a sick neighbor to the hospital in Monrovia. He flew from Liberia to Dallas on September 20, when he was not yet showing symptoms of the virus. After developing a fever and abdominal pain on the 24th, Duncan sought care at Texas Health Presbyterian on the 25th, but he was sent home. He later returned to the hospital after his symptoms worsened, and he was put in isolation there on September 28. He had been receiving an experimental treatment, brincidofovir, a drug that had previously only been used to fight other viruses. There are no more remaining doses of ZMapp, the experimental drug used to treat Kent Brantly, the American doctor who was previously diagnosed with Ebola and treated in Georgia. The fact that Duncan was turned away when he first attempted to seek treatment will likely become a point of further controversy. Between the two hospital admissions, Duncan writhed on a bed in a Dallas apartment, and he came into contact with up to 50 people, including five school aged children. Health workers are currently monitoring the exposed individuals for signs of the disease. At first, the hospital blamed its lapse on a "flaw" with its electronic health record system, saying that although Duncan told nurses he recently traveled to Liberia, that information did not automatically jump into the doctors' side of the records. However, the hospital later backtracked on that claim, saying there was "no flaw" with the records. Earlier this week, Dallas County Commissioner John Wiley Price, who is black, suggested that the hospital's snafu was a sign of endemic racism in the way emergency room patients are handled. "We know why what happened at Presbyterian happened," he told reporters. "If a person who looks like me shows up without insurance, they don't get the same treatment." Duncan, 42, was a native of Liberia and had escaped the country's brutal 1990s civil war. He met a woman, Louise Troh, in a refugee camp in the Ivory Coast, and they had a son together, Karsiah. Troh and the boy managed to obtain a U.S. immigration visa in the late 90s, but Duncan did not and had to remain in West Africa. Duncan finally scored a visitor's visa to the U.S. this summer, and he and Troh planned to reunite and marry in the U.S., the Dallas Morning News reported. His son, a college student in Texas, was looking forward to seeing his dad. Soon after he arrived, though, Duncan began to experience the fever, sweating, and vomiting that come with Ebola. The day he was diagnosed with the virus, he reportedly apologized to Troh for bringing it into her home. "He told her, 'I'm so sorry all of this is happening,'" Saymendy Lloyd, a close friend of Troh, told the Washington Post. "I would not put the love of my life in danger."
FRISCO, Texas Crews transported a patient exhibiting "signs and symptoms of Ebola" from a urgent care center to Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas. The patient, a sheriff's deputy who accompanied county health officials into the quarantined apartment where Thomas Eric Duncan stayed in Dallas, had contact with Duncan's family members inside the apartment. Duncan, who traveled to the United States from Liberia, died Wednesday morning at Texas Health Presbyterian. Duncan had been in critical condition after being diagnosed with the virus in mid September. People who had contact with the 42 year old Liberian national are being monitored for symptoms.
Thomas Duncan, the first person diagnosed with Ebola in the United States, died at a Texas hospital Wednesday. Duncan had been at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas since late last month. He was sent home when he first came to the hospital. Four days later, when he was admitted, his condition had worsened. Duncan received an experimental treatment and kidney dialysis during his treatment. Health officials continue to keep an eye on those he came in contact with. In response to Duncan's death, Secretary of State John Kerry made an appeal to other nations today. "While we are making progress we are not where we can say we need to be," said Secretary Kerry. "And there is additional needs that have to be met in order for the global community to be able to properly respond to this challenge and to make sure we protect people in all of our countries."
Thomas Duncan, a Liberian national and the first patient diagnosed outside of Africa, dies at Dallas hospital where he was being treated Thomas Eric Duncan, the first patient to be diagnosed with Ebola outside Africa, died on Wednesday, the Texas hospital that was treating him announced. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning," the Texas Health Presbyterian hospital said in a statement. Duncan, 42, died at 7.51am, according to the hospital. "Mr Duncan succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola. He fought courageously in this battle. Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time," the statement said. Late last month, Duncan became the first patient to be diagnosed in the US with the virus, the current outbreak of which has killed more than 3,400 people in west Africa, including in his native Liberia. David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas department of state health services, expressed condolences for Duncan's family. "The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal. Today they lost a dear member of their family. They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts. "The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways. We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat." Texas officials said Duncan's body will be cremated in accordance with guidlines developed by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC) for handling infected bodies. The body will be enclosed in two bags for transportation. Once the body is placed inside the bags, protective gear is not necessary for anyone who is not handling the body. Lakey said he visited the family and explained to them personally that the state recommended cremating the body for public health reasons and the family agreed. "This is a difficult time for the family, and our thoughts are with them," Lakey said in an afternoon statement. "We will continue to treat Mr Duncan with dignity and respect, and we're taking great care to make sure there is no additional risk that others could be infected." The Dallas Independent School District said in a statement that it is "saddened to learn of Mr Thomas Duncan's passing" and that schools would make counselling services available to the students and staff affected by his death. Five school age children were pulled from classes and are under observation. Duncan travelled from Liberia to the US on 19 September to reunite with his girlfriend, Louise Troh, the mother of his son, Karsiah. After falling ill, Duncan was first turned away from hospital, before being admitted two days later when he became more seriously sick. He was brought by ambulance to Texas Health Presbyterian on 28 September, where he was admitted and placed in isolation. Troh and three members of her family were placed under quarantine, where they must remain until 19 October. They were moved from their Dallas apartment on Friday to an undisclosed location in the city. Duncan's Ebola diagnosis was confirmed last Tuesday and his condition worsened over the weekend. His liver function declined, he was placed on dialysis and was breathing through a respirator. The hospital had begun treating Duncan with the experimental antiviral drug brincidofovir. The way the hospital initially handled Duncan on his first visit has raised questions over hospitals' preparedness for treating the disease, prompting the CDC to update its guidelines for healthcare facilities around the country. His girlfriend and her family are under quarantine at an undisclosed location, after being moved from their apartment on Friday. Officials are monitoring 10 people believed to have had direct contact with Duncan, including four who were sharing an apartment with him when he became ill. Another 38 people who may have come into contact with Duncan, but who are considered to be at much lower risk, are also being monitored. So far none has displayed symptoms of the virus. It's believed that Duncan contracted the disease while helping his landlord take their 19 year old daughter to an Ebola treatment ward in Monrovia. Convulsing and seven months pregnant, the young woman was turned away from the overcrowded hospital apparently because it lacked the space to treat her. Duncan helped the girl's family take her home again, where she died hours later. The young woman's brother began showing symptoms of the virus around the same time as Duncan. The brother, however, died days later on the way to hospital in Monrovia. Duncan did not declare that he had been in contact with Ebola when he completed a pre flight questionnaire at Monrovia airport before travelling to the US. The White House on Wednesday tightened up procedures for monitoring people arriving in the US from west Africa, where the disease is prevalent. On Tuesday, the civil rights leader Rev Jesse Jackson travelled to Dallas to pray with Duncan's family, who came from North Carolina. The family was able to glimpse their ill relative through the hospital's camera system. "I just came by here because I feel like God was calling me to come see my dad," said Karsiah Duncan, 19, speaking at at a news conference Tuesday night hosted by a Dallas church. Karsiah hadn't seen his father since he was three years old. Duncan's half sister, Mai Wureh, said he planned to marry Louise, Karsiah's mother, and apply for permanent status to remain in the US with his family. Stanley Gaye, president of the Liberian Community Association of Dallas Fort Worth, told the Guardian that Duncan's death had come as a shock as he was hopeful that the patient would pull through. "My spirit has been broken. I'm disappointed, I was hoping for the best, I didn't think it was coming to this," Gaye said.
Family and friends of the first person to die of Ebola in the United States condemned the medical care that Thomas Eric Duncan received and called for a full examination of the case. Duncan, 42, who was from Liberia, died Wednesday in Dallas after being infected with Ebola in Africa. He had been in isolation, being treated with an experimental drug, since Sept. 28. Hours after Duncan's death was announced, his fiancee, Louise Troh, called for an examination of how Duncan was treated. "I trust a thorough examination will take place regarding all aspects of his care," she said in a statement. Duncan, who had left Liberia Sept. 19, was treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital with the experimental antiviral drug brincidofovir. However, he did not receive any transfusion of blood from an Ebola patient who had recovered. That treatment is considered experimental and was used on another American who has since recovered. There also are questions about how Duncan was treated when he first arrived at the hospital Sept. 25, complaining of symptoms and telling personnel that he had traveled from West Africa. The travel information should have been a warning sign, officials have said. Duncan was released with antibiotics. He was rushed back to the hospital three days later with more severe symptoms. Troh's daughter, Youngor Jallah, condemned the hospital's actions. "The hospital didn't treat him right," Jallah said. "That's what everybody thinks," added Aaron Yah, the father of four children with Jallah. "One, he's from Africa," Jallah said of Duncan. "Two, he didn't have insurance." Dallas County Commissioner John Wiley Price, who is black, raised questions over whether Duncan was initially released from a Dallas hospital because of his race and lack of health insurance. "The real elephant in the room is, the man was black, he had no insurance, and therefore he was basically turned away," Price told the Los Angeles Times. When asked how he knew Duncan didn't have insurance, Price said, "If he had pulled out an insurance card, he wouldn't have had a problem. I'm willing to stake my life on the fact he didn't have insurance. He's from Liberia!" Price called Texas Health Presbyterian a "boutique" hospital that doesn't normally serve indigent patients. Price added "I make the claim, we know he didn't have insurance, and he was black. They did that they traditionally do They gave him some pills and sent him on his way, basically ignoring all the CDC protocols. "If you're of color and present without insurance they're not going to call it 'dumping,' but in the final analysis, that's basically what they did," he said. A hospital spokesman responded "Mr. Duncan was treated the way any other patient would have been treated, regardless of nationality or ability to pay for care. We have a long history of treating a multicultural community in this area." Yah has insurance, and his children are covered by Medicaid, but Jallah does not have insurance and is worried what might happen if she falls ill. As of Wednesday, she said she and her children were healthy. But she was holding a cold compress to her head, stressed by Duncan's death, cooped up in a stuffy apartment that had been without power for days after a Thursday storm. Jallah lives near her mother and usually takes her children to Texas Health Presbyterian's emergency room for treatment. Now, she does not trust the hospital, she said. "It's my worry ... that I will be treated the same way" as Duncan, Jallah said.
According to health officials, Dallas Ebola patient Thomas Eric Duncan died Wednesday morning at 7 51 am. Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, where Duncan was being treated, released the following statement "Mr. Duncan succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola. He fought courageously in this battle. Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time." Duncan left his home country of Liberia on September 19, 2014 and arrived in the United States on September 20th with no virus symptoms. He initially went to the hospital after 10 p.m. on Thursday, September 25, but presented no flu or other contagious virus symptoms and was given antibiotics and released. Duncan's condition deteriorated and by Sunday, September 28 was so bad that he was transported back to the hospital by ambulance. Officials with the Centers for Disease Control confirmed that Duncan was infected with the Ebola virus on October 1st.. Duncan had been in isolation at Presbyterian Hospital for more than 10 days. Medical officials stated that he was on a ventilator, receiving kidney dialysis, and had been receiving an experimental Ebola treatment "brincidofovir" since Saturday October 4th. Complete Coverage Of Ebola In Dallas Duncan's son Kasiah came to visit his father at the hospital on Tuesday in hopes of seeing him, but that did not happen."I came down here because I feel like God was calling me to come see my dad," he said. The college freshman also had some advice for his mother, who remains in isolation and under observation for at least 12 more days. "Be strong. It is hard being in the house for 21 days," he said, "not knowing what was going to happen after she gets out and stuff. I hope you all keep praying my family's okay." Original article http dfw.cbslocal.com 2014 10 08 dallas ebola patient dies from disease
Los Angeles Times DALLAS Thomas Eric Duncan, the first Ebola patient diagnosed in the United States, died Wednesday more than a week after he was hospitalized in Dallas, officials announced. Separately, Texas officials announced there was a second patient with possible symptoms. A spokesman for the city of Frisco said emergency crews had picked up someone "exhibiting signs and symptoms of Ebola" and was transporting the patient to the hospital. "The patient claims to have had contact with the Dallas 'patient zero,'" Dana Baird, communications director for Frisco, said in a statement. "Patient zero" is Duncan. But Frisco Fire Chief Mark Piland said at a subsequent news conference that the patient was not one of those who had contact with Duncan. "This patient is not one of the 48 under monitoring" in Dallas, Piland said. "This patient had reported that they had been in the apartment of the initial Ebola patient in Dallas," Piland said. "They had not had contact with the patient, but (with) family members." Nevertheless, firefighters and paramedics are "currently being decontaminated" with advice from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, to be safe, Piland said. The patient did not have all the symptoms of Ebola, he said. Health officials are interviewing the patient about his contacts, Piland said, but "right now they're treating this as a low risk event." Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas, which treated Duncan, confirmed that the patient had been "admitted to the emergency room after reporting possible exposure to the Ebola virus. Right now, there are more questions than answers about this case." CDC Director Tom Frieden called for perspective. So far, he said, the person "had neither definite contact (with Duncan) nor definite symptoms" of Ebola. Duncan, 42, had become a human face of Ebola for many Americans who were unaware of the disease that has ravaged parts of West Africa and killed more than 3,400 people there. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 a.m.," Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas said in a statement. Duncan will be cremated to kill any virus in the body so the remains can be returned to the family, the state announced. Duncan left Liberia on Sept. 19 to visit Louise Troh, with whom he was reconciling and planned to marry in Dallas. They were planning to live as a family with their son. "His suffering is over," Troh said in a statement. "My family is in deep sadness and grief, but we leave him in the hands of God. Our deepest sympathies go out to his father and family in Liberia and here in America." "I trust a thorough examination will take place regarding all aspects of his care," she said. "I am now dealing with the sorrow and anger that his son was not able to see him before he died. This will take some time, but in the end, I believe in a merciful God." Duncan told his fiancee the day he was diagnosed last week that he regretted exposing her to the deadly virus and had he known he was carrying Ebola, he would have "preferred to stay in Liberia and died than bring this to you," Saymendy Lloyd, a close friend of Troh said Wednesday. "He apologized to Louise the day they told him what he had," Lloyd said. "He told her, 'I'm so sorry all of this is happening. ... I would not put the love of my life in danger.'" Family members gathered in Dallas and were able to see Duncan on Monday via a laptop camera in his hospital room, she said. "He is not responsive at all. They said he was drugged and they put him in deep sleep," said Lloyd, who said she was driving Wednesday to see Duncan's son, Karsiah Duncan, 19, a student at Angelo State University. Lloyd said Tuesday's hospital visit was the first time Duncan's mother, who lives in North Carolina, saw her son since he entered the United States last month. "When we saw him, they only showed us his head, with all the tubes in his mouth," Lloyd said. "They told us yesterday that his condition was improving, that his liver was functioning better, they gave us all this good news," she said of doctors, "This is not the result we were hoping for. His son is very upset right now." Karsiah Duncan was 3 years old when he last saw his father. "We're just trying right now to adjust to the situation. It's very emotional," Lloyd said, "We just trying to grasp the fact that he's dead." She said Louise called her Wednesday morning with the news of Duncan's death. "She has been stronger than I am. She called me this morning to hold me up," Lloyd said. "She just said, 'I'm finished, I'm finished,' that's all she could say. She was crying. She's tired. She can't believe this. "In our culture, when you say 'I'm finished' it can mean I have no more questions, I have no more complaints, I can't question God," Lloyd said. Troh along with nine others constitute the high risk group of contacts because Duncan stayed in her apartment, less than a mile from the hospital where he was treated and released with antibiotics on Sept. 25. He was rushed back to the hospital on Sept. 28 and formally diagnosed with Ebola days later. In the hospital, Duncan had been treated with the experimental antiviral drug brincidofovir. Officials have been monitoring Duncan's immediate and secondary contacts, but none of the 48 people has developed any symptoms, officials said. "The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal. Today they lost a dear member of their family," stated Texas health commissioner David Lakey. "They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts. The doctors, nurses and staff at Presbyterian provided excellent and compassionate care, but Ebola is a disease that attacks the body in many ways." Duncan met Troh when they lived next door to each other in a refugee camp in Ivory Coast, said Wilfred Smallwood, a former Liberian journalist who said he grew up with Duncan. Duncan was the son of an American educated Liberian engineer who worked for an American mining company. As a boy, Duncan the youngest of seven siblings was fascinated by airplanes and wanted to be a pilot. The entire family applied to resettle in the U.S., Smallwood said. A sister was the first to be accepted, settling in Baltimore and working as a nurse to support the family. But Duncan was not so lucky. He remained in the refugee community, then moved to Ghana where he pursued vocational training and learned to make soap, Smallwood said. Less than a year ago, Duncan returned to Liberia, Smallwood said. In late August, he finally got approval to fly to the U.S. Duncan was elated. Smallwood remembered the phone call "I got my visa! I got my visa!" Duncan said. Duncan had left Liberia on Sept. 19 and arrived in Dallas on Sept. 20. Health officials have said that no one who was on planes with him is in danger because Duncan had no temperature and no symptoms until after arriving in the U.S. Ebola, a deadly virus that has killed about 70 percent of those infected during the latest outbreak in West Africa, is transmitted by contact with its victims' bodily fluids such as vomit, blood or saliva. More than 3,400 people have died of Ebola in West Africa during the current outbreak the worst on record. Experts say Ebola patients are contagious only once they are displaying symptoms, including a fever above 101.5 degrees, severe headaches, muscle pain, diarrhea and vomiting. (Hennessy Fiske reported from Dallas, Pearce and Muskal from Los Angeles. Staff writer Connie Stewart in Los Angeles contributed to this report.)
The first Ebola patient diagnosed in the United States died on Wednesday at a hospital in Dallas, a city in the northern part of the U.S. state of Texas, hospital authorities said. Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas said in a statement "it is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 a.m." A day earlier, the hospital listed him in "critical but stable" condition. And the patient reportedly showed some "positive signs. " Wednesday's statement did not elaborate on Duncan's condition. Duncan, a Liberian national, was tested positive for Ebola on Sept. 30 as the first confirmed case diagnosed in the United States. He arrived in Dallas on Sept. 20 to visit family and fell ill several days later. Duncan, 42, went to the Dallas hospital on Sept. 26, only to be dismissed with some antibiotics. Two days later, he was rushed back to the hospital in an ambulance because of a deterioration of illness and has been kept in isolation since. Health officials in Dallas are now keeping a close eye on some 50 people who may have had contact with Duncan. Among them, 10 people who had close contact with him are deemed to be at higher risk. So far, no one has shown any Ebola symptoms. Ebola symptoms can include fever, muscle pain, vomiting and bleeding, and can appear as long as 21 days after exposure to the virus. Ebola, which was discovered in 1976, has killed 3,431 people and infected 7,470 people since the outbreak in West Africa in March this year, the World Health Organization said in its latest report.
NEW YORK The first known person to develop Ebola in the United States died Wednesday at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas. He was 42. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 am. Mr Duncan succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola. He fought courageously in this battle," a statement from Texas Health Resources said. "Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time," the statement continued. A day before Duncan's death, a top government official said doctors were scrambling to keep him alive. "What we have learned about Ebola is how important it is to get the patient's basic care right," said Dr Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The CDC confirmed Sept 30 that Duncan tested positive for Ebola, quickly announcing to the public that it would be tracking down potential contacts alongside local officials. Since then, authorities have identified 10 people who definitely came into direct contact with Duncan, and 38 possible contacts, Frieden said Tuesday. The Dallas hospital has been criticised for turning Duncan away when he first came to their emergency room on Sept 25 with symptoms and told them he was travelling from Liberia. That incident represented "a teachable moment," Frieden said Oct 2. According to authorities, Duncan arrived in Dallas on Sept 20 from Liberia, and did not develop any symptoms for several days. Because of this, Frieden and others have said, he would not have been infectious during the flight. Now officials will face the question of how to handle Duncan's remains. Doctors know that the body of someone who's just died of Ebola is dangerous The virus can live in bodily fluids and tissue so long as they stay wet and room temperature. Many deaths have been linked to the handling of bodies in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. Anyone at the hospital who is handling the body of someone who died of Ebola must wear personal protective equipment, including a scrub suit, cap, gown over the suit, eye protection, face mask and two pairs of gloves, it was pointed out. The body must be wrapped in a plastic shroud. It should not be washed. It must be put into a leak proof plastic bag that zips closed, and then into another one right away. This whole package should be disinfected and then the room disinfected. The body should then either be cremated or put into a hermetically sealed casket immediately so that family members can safely have a funeral, according to the CDC. The current outbreak of Ebola, the worst ever recorded, has killed 3,879 people out of 8,033 cases as of Oct 5, according to a Wednesday report from the World Health Organisation. The situation in the most heavily affected countries Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone "continues to deteriorate," the WHO report said.
HOUSTON, Oct. 8 The first Ebola patient diagnosed in the United States died on Wednesday at a hospital in Dallas, a city in the northern part of the U.S. state of Texas, hospital authorities said. Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas said in a statement "it is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 a.m." A day earlier, the hospital listed him in "critical but stable" condition. And the patient reportedly showed some "positive signs. " Wednesday's statement did not elaborate on Duncan's condition. Duncan, a Liberian national, was tested positive for Ebola on Sept. 30 as the first confirmed case diagnosed in the United States. He arrived in Dallas on Sept. 20 to visit family and fell ill several days later. Duncan, 42, went to the Dallas hospital on Sept. 26, only to be dismissed with some antibiotics. Two days later, he was rushed back to the hospital in an ambulance because of a deterioration of illness and has been kept in isolation since. Health officials in Dallas are now keeping a close eye on some 50 people who may have had contact with Duncan. Among them, 10 people who had close contact with him are deemed to be at higher risk. So far, no one has shown any Ebola symptoms. Ebola symptoms can include fever, muscle pain, vomiting and bleeding, and can appear as long as 21 days after exposure to the virus. Ebola, which was discovered in 1976, has killed 3,431 people and infected 7,470 people since the outbreak in West Africa in March this year, the World Health Organization said in its latest report.
DALLAS Ebola patient Thomas Eric Duncan died Wednesday morning, according to a statement from a Texas Health Resources spokesperson. "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51 a.m.," says the statement made by Wendell Watson, public relations director at the hospital. "Mr. Duncan succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola. He fought courageously in this battle," the statement said. Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins also released a statement, saying his thoughts are with Duncan's family and friends, "especially his fianc e Louise, their son Karsiah and all those who loved him." Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings's statement said in part that the city "will stop the Ebola virus in its tracks from spreading into our community. I want to reinforce to the public, that this was an isolated incident of the Ebola virus contracted by the individual while residing in another country." Duncan, 42, arrived in Dallas on Sept. 20 and fell ill a few days later. He went to the emergency room at Texas Health Presbyterian Dallas Hospital on Sept. 25, but was discharged. He returned two days later and was diagnosed with Ebola on Sept. 30. He was given the experimental drug brincidofovir. Duncan had stayed with his girlfriend, Louise Troh, and other family members at The Ivy Apartments in Dallas before he was hospitalized. Troh and the three other family members who had been quarantined in the apartment were moved Friday to an undisclosed location. They are considered "high risk" contacts, and another 38 people, including the ambulance crew that brought Duncan to the hospital, are seen as "low risk" contacts. The quarantine period is 21 days after possible exposure. The apartment where Duncan stayed was cleaned up by The Cleaning Guys of Fort Worth, who donned hazmat suits and worked around the clock to do the job. Zachary Thompson, Dallas County's health and human services director, is asking the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to conduct an assessment of the northeast Dallas complex or recommend someone else to do one, for the "comfort level" of the residents at the apartment complex. The Dallas school district plans to make counseling available to students and staff, according to a statement posted online. The statement says the five students who possibly had contact with Duncan still have no symptoms and will not return to school until the 21 day quarantine period is over. Dr. David Lakey, the commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, in a statement called the past week "an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal. Today they lost a dear member of their family." He added, "We'll continue every effort to contain the spread of the virus and protect people from this threat."
MADRID (AP) A Spanish Health Ministry official says a nurse who treated a Sierra Leone missionary for Ebola has tested positive for the disease, with authorities awaiting the results of a second test to confirm what would be the first known infection inside Spain. The official said Monday the female nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old priest who died in a hospital last month after being flown to Madrid from Africa. The woman went to the Alcorcon hospital in the Madrid suburbs with a high fever and was placed in isolation. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity in accordance with the regulations of his job, declined to name the woman. The Health Ministry will give a news conference later Monday.
Nurse was part of medical team that treated Sierra Leone priest who died in hospital last month after being flown to Madrid A nurse in Spain has tested positive for the Ebola virus after treating a patient repatriated to Madrid from Sierra Leone, according to sources within the country's health authorities. Officials are now waiting for the results of a second test, which if positive would make the nurse the first patient to have been infected with the virus outside west Africa. The nurse was part of the team attending to a Spanish missionary with Ebola who was repatriated two weeks ago. The 69 year old missionary, Manuel Garc a Viejo, died just four days after being brought to Madrid's Carlos III hospital. The nurse arrived at a hospital in Alcorc n with high fever on Monday, said authorities, and the first round of tests tested positive for the deadly virus. Ebola protocol has been put in place while officials wait for the results of a second round of testing. In August, 75 year old Spanish missionary Miguel Pajares died in Madrid after being repatriated from Liberia five days earlier. He was the first patient in the current, fast spreading outbreak to be evacuated to Europe for treatment. Pajares' repatriation to Madrid prompted concern among health professionals who said that Spanish hospitals were not adequately equipped to handle the Ebola outbreak. Amyts, a trade union that represents physicians, called the repatriation risky, and its president, Daniel Bernab u, asked Spanish news agency Efe if "anyone could guarantee 100 that the virus wouldn't escape". Bernab u compared Spain to the US and pointed out that the Americans have 10 hospitals with the highest level of biosafety possible. Spain, in contrast, has just one suitable hospital with biosafety levels that are much lower.
By Emma Pinedo MADRID, Oct 6 (Reuters) A Spanish nurse who last month treated a priest in Madrid who died of Ebola has tested positive for the disease, becoming the first to contract it outside West Africa, a source within the health authorities said on Monday. The nurse treated elderly priest Manuel Garcia Viejo at the Madrid hospital Carlos III when he was repatriated from Sierra Leone with the disease. Garcia Viejo died days later, the second Spanish priest to die after being repatriated from Africa with the disease. The source said the nurse had tested positive for Ebola in initial tests and officials were awaiting final results. Two separate sources within the health authorities told Reuters the nurse was treated in the hospital of Alcorcon, on the outskirts of Madrid, where she went earlier on Monday with symptoms of fever. Spain's Health Ministry was due to hold a news conference to give further information at 1800 GMT. (Writing by Sarah Morris Editing by Julien Toyer)
MADRID, Spain A Spanish Health Ministry official says a nurse who treated a Sierra Leone missionary for Ebola has tested positive for the disease, with authorities awaiting the results of a second test to confirm what would be the first known infection inside Spain. The official said Monday the female nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old priest who died in a hospital last month after being flown to Madrid from Africa. The woman went to the Alcorcon hospital in the Madrid suburbs with a high fever and was placed in isolation. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity in accordance with the regulations of his job, declined to name the woman. The Health Ministry will give a news conference later Monday.
An assistant nurse who treated an Ebola patient in a Madrid hospital has tested positive for the virus herself. She is believed to be the first person to contract the disease in Europe. The female nurse was part of the medical team at the Madrid hospital Carlos III that treated a 69 year old priest who died of Ebola last month, a Spanish health ministry official said on Monday evening. The woman checked into a hospital in the Madrid suburb of Alcorc n reporting a high fever and has been put in isolation, the official said. "Two tests were done and the two were positive," a spokesman for the health department of the regional government of Madrid told news agency AFP. The woman is believed to be the first person to contract the disease outside Africa. The nurse had treated missionary Manuel Garcia Viejo, who had been working in Sierra Leone when he contracted the disease. He was flown to Spain, but died in hospital within a few days. He was the second Spanish priest to die from Ebola. The World Health Organization says Ebola has killed almost 3,500 people in West Africa, with the majority of cases in Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone.
An unnamed Spanish nurse is thought to be the first person to contract Ebola outside of Africa, according to BBC News. The nurse tested positive in initial tests, but doctors are still awaiting final results. As part of the team treating Spanish priest Manuel Garcia Viejo, who contracted the disease while abroad in Sierra Leone, the nurse may have been exposed to the deadly virus. Viejo later died in a Madrid hospital.
The news that a nurse in a Spanish hospital has been infected with the Ebola virus by a patient she was helping to treat will greatly dismay those trying to reassure people in Europe and the US that they are safe from the disease. This should not happen. In countries with sophisticated healthcare systems, such as Spain and the US, it ought to be almost impossible for a nurse to become infected once the hospital is aware that it has an Ebola patient. In Dallas, ambulance workers were put at risk and are now effectively in quarantine because of ignorance the hospital did not know that Thomas Duncan might be infected with the virus when they responded to the call to transport a sick man. But in Spain there does not seem to be that excuse. The priest Manuel Garcia Viejo, whom the nurse was helping to treat at Madrid's Carlos III hospital, had been repatriated from Liberia precisely because he had Ebola. The virus is transmitted from one person to another through bodily fluids and the sicker the patient becomes, the higher the levels of virus in those fluids, which include blood, urine and vomit. The sick are more dangerous to people nursing them than to almost anybody else. But strict infection control procedures work in the challenging circumstances of west Africa most of the time and should not fail in Europe. Any nurse, doctor or anyone else who has contact with a patient must be in a protective suit, complete with gloves and face mask. The patient will be in isolation and strict hygiene and sanitation measures will be in force. Among the urgent questions now facing the Spanish health authorities will be whether the nurse treating the priest might have removed or failed to put on any part of this protective clothing. Experts will hope there is a rapid answer to that, because there is a real danger otherwise that scare stories, without any scientific evidence, will circulate on the internet. Scientists and doctors have repeatedly said that Ebola is not transmitted through water droplets in the air from coughs and sneezes. It does not have a respiratory route for infecting people. It will be important now to ascertain exactly what happened in Madrid so that any such rumours can be quickly scotched.
A Spanish Health Ministry official says a nurse who treated a Sierra Leone missionary for Ebola has tested positive for the disease, with authorities awaiting the results of a second test to confirm what would be the first known infection inside Spain. The official said Monday the female nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old priest who died in a hospital last month after being flown to Madrid from Africa. The woman went to the Alcorcon hospital in the Madrid suburbs with a high fever and was placed in isolation. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity in accordance with the regulations of his job, declined to name the woman. The Health Ministry will give a news conference later Monday.
A nurse who treated a Sierra Leone missionary for Ebola has tested positive for the disease, with authorities awaiting the results of a second test to confirm what would be the first known infection inside Spain. The female nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old priest who died in a hospital last month after being flown to Madrid from Africa. The woman went to the Alcorcon hospital in the Madrid suburbs with a high fever and was placed in isolation. The Health Ministry will give a news conference later.
Spain's Health Minister says a nurse who treated a missionary from Sierra Leone for Ebola at a Madrid hospital has tested positive for the disease, in what is the first reported incident of transmission outside Africa. Health Minister Ana Mato said on Monday the female nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old Spanish priest who died in a hospital last month after being flown back from Sierra Leone, where he was posted. The woman went to the Alcorcon hospital in the Madrid suburbs with a fever and was placed in isolation. Mato says the infection was confirmed by two tests.
A Spanish nurse has become the first suspected person to have contracted the Ebola virus outside of western Africa. The female medic was part of the team that treated a 69 year old Spanish priest called Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died from the disease two weeks ago. The priest had been working as a missionary in Sierra Leone when he contracted Ebola and had been flown back to his home country for specialist treatment. He was the second Spaniard to fall victim to the disease the first was also a priest, called Miguel Pajares, 75, who died in August after working as a missionary in Liberia. Spain's Health Minister Ana Mato confirmed that the nurse was placed in isolation after attending the Alcorcon hospital on the outskirts of Madrid displaying a fever. Local media in Spain is reporting that staff at the Madrid hospital where the nurse became infected have claimed that their protective suits did not meet health and safety requirements though this has yet to be substantiated. Two tests confirmed the positive result and a fever was her only symptom, it was revealed. Spain's Health Minister Ana Mato during the press conference today She is understood to be in a stable condition, Reuters reports, and reportedly began to feel ill on 30 September. Ms Mato added that the authorities were working to track down all those who came into contact with the unnamed nurse and that emergency procedures had been put in place to protect Spanish citizens. Ebola is thought to have killed more than 3,400 people so far in the worst outbreak ever recorded, in figures by the World Health Organisation (WHO). Guidance published today by the WHO defines what it knows on the transmission of Ebola, reiterating that it is passed via "close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, faeces and vomit". It adds that the virus has also been found in breast milk, urine and semen and in a recovering male, can still be infectious in semen for at least 70 days. "Saliva and tears may also carry some risk", it adds, though "the science is inconclusive". Meanwhile, US officials today ruled out a travel ban to the worst hit regions in Africa, but said it was looking into possibly stepping up screening measures at airports. "What we're looking to do is review these screening measures," White House spokesman Josh Earnest said, reports Reuters.
MADRID (AP) Spain's Health Minister says a nurse who treated a missionary from Sierra Leone for Ebola at a Madrid hospital has tested positive for the disease, in what is the first reported incident of transmission outside Africa. Health Minister Ana Mato said on Monday the female nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old Spanish priest who died in a hospital last month after being flown back from Sierra Leone, where he was posted. The woman went to the Alcorcon hospital in the Madrid suburbs with a fever and was placed in isolation. Mato says the infection was confirmed by two tests.
A SPANISH nurse's assistant has become the first known person to contract Ebola outside of Africa, as an American cameraman with the disease arrived at a Nebraska hospital for treatment. The female nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old Spanish priest who died in a hospital last month after being flown back from Sierra Leone, where he was posted, Spain's Health Minister Ana Mato said. The woman went to the Alcorcon hospital in the Madrid suburbs with a fever and was placed in isolation. Mato said the infection was confirmed by two tests and that the nurse was admitted to a hospital on Sunday. WORRIED Ebola victim says 'I think I'm in trouble' The woman's only symptom was a fever, Antonio Alemany, Madrid director of primary health care, told a news conference. Alemany said authorities are drawing up a list of people the nurse had contact with. The Spanish priest the nurse helped treat was Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died on September 25, becoming the second Spanish missionary to fall victim to the deadly virus. In August, a 75 year old Spanish priest, Miguel Pajares, was flown back to Spain from Liberia, but died after being treated with the experimental Ebola medicine ZMapp. World Health Organisation officials couldn't immediately be reached after office hours to comment on the case. The news came as an American photojournalist infected with Ebola in Liberia was able to walk off a plane in Nebraska. Ashoka Mukpo, 33, tested positive for Ebola last week while working as a freelance cameraman for NBC News and was flown to the United States for treatment. He is the fifth American to be evacuated from West Africa in the midst of the world's largest outbreak of Ebola with the aid of the US State Department. His parents and doctors addressed the media on Monday after he was admitted to Nebraska Medical Center, the same place that treated Rick Sacra, a US missionary doctor who came down with Ebola and has since recovered. Mukpo currently has a fever and is experiencing some nausea, they said. "We are really happy that his symptoms are not extreme yet," his mother, Diana Mukpo, told reporters. Doctors said it often takes eight to 10 days for a person infected with Ebola to show symptoms, which can begin with fever and aches and then escalate, leading to diarrhoea, vomiting, internal bleeding and organ failure. Ebola is spread through close contact with the bodily fluids of an infected person or by touching the corpse of a person who has recently died of the virus. The virus first emerged in 1976 and so far this year has killed more than 3300 people, or about half the people it has infected in West Africa. Mukpo had lived and worked in Liberia for a non governmental organisation for two years before returning to the United States in May. He went back on September 4 and had begun freelancing for NBC News a day before he fell ill. He does not know how he became infected but Levy said his son believes it may have been when he was helping others spray wash a vehicle. "He was disinfecting a car in which someone had died," said Levy.
MADRID In the first known transmission of the current outbreak of Ebola outside West Africa, a Spanish nurse who treated a missionary for the disease at a Madrid hospital has tested positive for the virus, Spain's health minister said Monday. The female nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old Spanish priest who died in a hospital last month after being flown back from Sierra Leone, where he was posted, Health Minister Ana Mato said. She is believed to have contracted the virus from that priest. The World Health Organization confirmed there has not been a previous transmission outside West Africa in the current outbreak. WHO spokeswoman Fadela Chaib told The Associated Press that so far there have only been confirmed cases in West Africa and the United States, and no known transmission outside West Africa. The organization is awaiting official notification of the case from Spanish authorities. The woman went to the Alcorcon hospital in the Madrid suburbs with a fever on Sunday and was placed in isolation. Mato said the infection was confirmed by two tests. The woman's only symptom was a fever and she was on vacation when she fell sick, Antonio Alemany, Madrid director of primary health care, told a news conference. Alemany said authorities are drawing up a list of people the nurse had contact with, though he did not say how many people that might be, or where she went on holiday. She is married but does not have children. Nobody apart from the woman is in quarantine, but her husband and the paramedics who admitted her on Sunday are being monitored. Officials did not say how or where. The nurse helped treat two Spanish missionaries who died after being flown back to Madrid with the deadly virus, officials said. She cared for Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died Sept. 25. In August, she also helped treat 75 year old Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, who was flown back to Spain from Liberia, but died after being treated with the experimental Ebola medicine ZMapp. The woman will be transferred for treatment to Madrid's Carlos III hospital. The virus that causes Ebola spreads only through direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infected person who is showing symptoms. In West Africa, the disease has spread quickly to family members who cared for the sick or handled their bodies after death. WHO estimates has the latest Ebola outbreak has killed more than 3,400 people. Barry Hatton in Lisbon, Portugal, Sarah DiLorenzo in Dakar, Senegal, and Frank Jordans in Berlin contributed to this report
MADRID In the first known transmission of the current outbreak of Ebola outside West Africa, a Spanish nurse who treated a missionary for the disease at a Madrid hospital has tested positive for the virus, Spain's health minister said Monday. The female nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old Spanish priest who died in a hospital last month after being flown back from Sierra Leone, where he was posted, Health Minister Ana Mato said. The nurse is believed to have contracted the virus from that priest. The World Health Organization confirmed there has not been a previous transmission outside West Africa in the current outbreak. WHO spokeswoman Fadela Chaib told The Associated Press that so far there have only been confirmed cases in West Africa and the United States, and no known transmission outside West Africa. The organization is awaiting official notification of the case from Spanish authorities. The woman went to the Alcorcon hospital in the Madrid suburbs with a fever on Sunday and was placed in isolation. Mato said the infection was confirmed by two tests. The woman's only symptom was a fever and she was on vacation when she fell sick, Antonio Alemany, Madrid director of primary health care, told a news conference. Alemany said authorities are drawing up a list of people the nurse had contact with, though he did not say how many people that might be, or where she went on holiday. She is married but does not have children. Nobody apart from the woman is in quarantine, but her husband and the paramedics who admitted her on Sunday are being monitored. Officials did not say how or where. The nurse helped treat two Spanish missionaries who died after being flown back to Madrid with the deadly virus, officials said. She cared for Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died Sept. 25. In August, she also helped treat 75 year old Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, who was flown back to Spain from Liberia, but died after being treated with the experimental Ebola medicine ZMapp. The woman will be transferred for treatment to Madrid's Carlos III hospital. The virus that causes Ebola spreads only through direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infected person who is showing symptoms. Spanish authorities said they were investigating how the nurse became infected at a hospital with modern health care facilities and special equipment for handling cases of deadly viruses. More than 370 health workers in West Africa have become infected in this outbreak, and more than half of those have died. Doctors and nurses there have worked under difficult conditions, treating patients in overflowing wards, sometimes without proper protection. But even under ideal conditions, experts warn that caring for Ebola patients always involves a risk. WHO estimates the latest Ebola outbreak has killed more than 3,400 people.
MADRID (AP) In the first known transmission of the current outbreak of Ebola outside West Africa, a Spanish nurse who treated a missionary for the disease at a Madrid hospital has tested positive for the virus, Spain's health minister said Monday. The female nurse was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old Spanish priest who died in a hospital last month after being flown back from Sierra Leone, where he was posted, Health Minister Ana Mato said. The nurse is believed to have contracted the virus from that priest. The World Health Organization confirmed there has not been a previous transmission outside West Africa in the current outbreak. WHO spokeswoman Fadela Chaib told The Associated Press that so far there have only been confirmed cases in West Africa and the United States, and no known transmission outside West Africa. The organization is awaiting official notification of the case from Spanish authorities. The woman went to the Alcorcon hospital in the Madrid suburbs with a fever on Sunday and was placed in isolation. Mato said the infection was confirmed by two tests. The woman's only symptom was a fever and she was on vacation when she fell sick, Antonio Alemany, Madrid director of primary health care, told a news conference. Alemany said authorities are drawing up a list of people the nurse had contact with, though he did not say how many people that might be, or where she went on holiday. She is married but does not have children. Nobody apart from the woman is in quarantine, but her husband and the paramedics who admitted her on Sunday are being monitored. Officials did not say how or where. The nurse helped treat two Spanish missionaries who died after being flown back to Madrid with the deadly virus, officials said. She cared for Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died Sept. 25. In August, she also helped treat 75 year old Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, who was flown back to Spain from Liberia, but died after being treated with the experimental Ebola medicine ZMapp. The woman will be transferred for treatment to Madrid's Carlos III hospital. The virus that causes Ebola spreads only through direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infected person who is showing symptoms. Spanish authorities said they were investigating how the nurse became infected at a hospital with modern health care facilities and special equipment for handling cases of deadly viruses. More than 370 health workers in West Africa have become infected in this outbreak, and more than half of those have died. Doctors and nurses there have worked under difficult conditions, treating patients in overflowing wards, sometimes without proper protection. But even under ideal conditions, experts warn that caring for Ebola patients always involves a risk. WHO estimates the latest Ebola outbreak has killed more than 3,400 people. Barry Hatton in Lisbon, Portugal, Sarah DiLorenzo in Dakar, Senegal, and Frank Jordans in Berlin contributed to this report. Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
In the first known case of Ebola transmission outside of Africa, a nurse in Spain has contracted the deadly virus after caring for a sick priest who had been flown back from West Africa for treatment, Spanish health minister Ana Mato said at a news conference Monday. Two tests confirmed the diagnosis of the woman, Mato said. She was part of a medical team treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, the priest who died Sept. 25 of Ebola, according to the BBC. The infected health worker's only symptom so far is a fever, and her condition remains stable, Mato said. Authorities are trying to determine how exactly she contracted Ebola and whether the team caring for the priest observed proper medical protocols, Mato added. Ebola is spread through direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infected person exhibiting symptoms. Authorities are already trying to trace all of the people the health care worker may have had contact with, said Madrid's primary health care director Antonio Alemany, according to the Associated Press. The 30 health care workers who came into contact with her will be under a 21 day period of monitoring, the incubation period for the disease to take hold, NBC news reported. The nurse worked as a sanitary technician, entering the priest's room once to treat him and one other time to collect his belongings, according to NBC News. She began showing symptoms Sept. 30 and went to a Madrid area hospital Sunday, AP reported. There have been more than 7,400 confirmed, suspected and probable cases of Ebola in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, according to World Health Organization figures released Friday. The death toll in the deadliest Ebola outbreak in history has surpassed 3,400. According to the WHO, "exposure of health care workers ... continues to be an alarming feature of this outbreak." As of Oct. 1, the WHO said, 382 health care workers have been infected by Ebola in West Africa 216 of them have died.
The nurse had helped treat another Ebola patient A nurse in Spain who treated two Ebola victims has tested positive for the virus, becoming the first known person to have contracted the disease outside of Africa, Spanish health minister Ana Mato announced Monday. The woman had worked as a part of the medical team that treated Spanish priest Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died of the virus in September, the Washington Post reports. She began feeling ill last week and went to a hospital on Sunday, though Mato said she is in stable condition and her only symptom thus far has been a fever. Two tests confirmed the Ebola diagnosis. The hospital is currently trying to identify how the woman became infected and is also monitoring all of the health workers who came into contact with her for signs of the virus. Washington Post
The French nurse who contracted the Ebola virus in Liberia has been cured and discharged from the hospital, announced Health Minister Marisol Touraine in a statement on Saturday. The Nurse was flown back to France on 19 September and received experimental medicines in a military hospital. The nurse was treating patients in Liberia with volunteer group M decins Sans Fronti res, known in English as Doctors Without Borders, when she started to exhibit symptoms several days before being flown back to France. The woman, who has not been identified, was the fist French person to be infected with the virus, which causes severe hemorrhagic fever and has a high fatality rate. She was treated in a specially equipped hospital in the Paris suburb of Saint Mand . France's health ministry said maximum precautions were taken to prevent any contagion. Touraine had authorised the use of three experimental drugs in France to try and treat Ebola. The French nurse had been given Agivan, which was approved in Japan in March, according to the company. The drug is produced by Japanese firm Toyama Chemical, a subsidary of FujiFilm holdings. Ebola has claimed the lives of more than 3,300 people in West Africa in the largest ever outbreak of the disease.
Barcelona, Spain A nurse in Spain has become the first health worker to be infected with the Ebola virus outside of West Africa, raising serious concerns about how prepared Western nations are to safely treat people with the deadly illness. The nurse contracted the illness while treating a Spanish missionary who was infected in Sierra Leone and flown to Madrid's Carlos III hospital, where he died on Sept. 25, Spain's Health Ministry said. The priest, Manuel Garcia Viejo, died three days after being flown back to Spain, and the nurse entered his room only twice, including once after his death, according to Antonio Alemany, a health official from the regional government of Madrid. The case is particularly worrisome to health experts because Spain is a developed country that is considered to possess the kind of rigorous infection control measures that should prevent disease transmission in the hospital. Although the Ebola epidemic has killed hundreds of doctors and nurses in West Africa, health officials in Europe and the United States have reassured the public repeatedly that if the disease reached their shores, their health care systems would be able to treat patients safely, without endangering health workers or the public. While the risk to hospital workers is thought to be far lower in developed countries, the infection of the Spanish nurse, along with the missteps in dealing with Ebola in Dallas, exposes weak spots in highly praised defense systems. Ana Mato, Spain's health minister, said in a televised news conference that the nurse, who has not been identified publicly, tested positive for Ebola twice, and that the rest of the 30 person team that looked after the missionary would be monitored to see if any of its members develop symptoms of Ebola. She said it was not clear how the nurse became infected. "It is certainly a sobering moment whenever we see a health care worker infected," said Abbigail Tumpey, a spokeswoman for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States. "It really highlights the need for rigorous infection control throughout everything health care workers are doing, starting with the triage of patients, getting patients into appropriate isolation and then appropriately treating and managing the patient. Any lapse could potentially expose somebody." Health officials in Spain said the team was properly equipped with protective gear, including gloves, gowns, masks and eye protection. The gear is meant to prevent exposure to bodily fluids, which spread the disease. But experts say the greatest risk comes from removing contaminated gear, which must be done according to a strict protocol to avoid infecting oneself. It takes training and practice. The case in Dallas, Tumpey added, has led the CDC to redouble its efforts to urge hospitals to be on the lookout for potential cases and to handle them correctly. Mato, the Spanish health minister, said, "We are trying to determine whether all the health safety protocols have been followed." Infections among health care workers are "an alarming feature of this outbreak," according to the World Health Organization. As of Oct. 1, 382 health workers in West Africa have contracted the disease, including 216 who died. The high rate has been attributed largely to the lack of personal protective gear, disinfectants and running water in many hospitals and clinics. Doctors Without Borders, a group known for its meticulous attention to infection control and success in protecting its workers, also reported on Monday that one of its staff members caring for patients in Sierra Leone had contracted Ebola. The worker is to be airlifted to Europe for treatment, and the group said it is investigating the case to try to find out how the infection occurred. Another of its workers was also infected previously, but recovered. Situated close to the highway that circles the Spanish capital, the Carlos III hospital is tied to the much larger La Paz hospital in Madrid, but it was selected because it has long specialized in researching HIV and other infectious as well as tropical diseases. In August, an entire floor of the hospital was sealed off and turned into an isolation unit, initially to treat Miguel Pajares, another Spanish priest who had been working in Africa and was the first European to be repatriated after being infected with Ebola. Pajares died Aug. 12, five days after entering the special unit. In August, when the Spanish government decided to repatriate Pajares, the decision raised some concerns among local medical experts about whether Spain had adequate infrastructure to handle such a case. Daniel Bernab u, the president of Amyts, a Spanish union representing doctors, said at the time that the government decision was "political and not sanitary." He claimed that neither the government nor anybody else could "guarantee 100 percent that the virus wouldn't escape." On Monday, Bernab u told Efe, the Spanish national news agency, that even if Spain had the means to prevent Ebola spreading from the infected nurse as it has done in Africa, her case "should be used by all of us to think about whether we should host everybody and how to do it well." Mato urged people to remain calm, adding that "all the possible measures" were being taken to guarantee public health safety. Antonio Alemany, a health official from the regional government of Madrid, told the news conference that the nurse went on vacation a day after Garcia Viejo died. She got in touch with a medical center on Sept. 30 after feeling feverish, but had been leading "a normal life" while on vacation, he added, without giving details on her whereabouts during that period. Alemany said the nurse initially showed only "low symptoms" of illness, with a fever of roughly 100 degrees. He described her current condition as stable. He would not estimate how many people had contact with the nurse in the past two weeks, saying that a complete list was being drawn up. On the list is the nurse's husband, Alemany said she has no children. Spanish newspaper websites listed her age as either 40 or 44. She has been kept in isolation in a hospital in Alcorcon, on the outskirts of Madrid, but not in a unit specialized to treat infections like Ebola. She was transferred to the Carlos III hospital late Monday.
WASHINGTON (AP) There are new concerns about the spread of the deadly Ebola virus, now that a nurse in Spain has become the first person known to have contracted the virus outside West Africa. The nurse was part of a team that treated two missionaries flown home to Spain after becoming infected in Liberia. And medical workers in Texas are waiting to find out if they've become infected by a Liberian man who became ill with Ebola after arriving in Dallas. (San Diego readiness story above)
MADRID A Spanish medical worker tested positive for Ebola after treating an Africa based missionary who had been infected with the virus and flown to Madrid, officials said on Monday, reporting the first suspected transmission outside West Africa. Spanish medical worker representatives expressed alarm over the case, saying it raised questions over the adequacy of the country's medical procedures for treating Ebola patients and preventing the spread of the disease in the country and beyond. The female medical worker was infected while working at Madrid's Carlos III hospital, which had been specially prepared to treat the disease. Spanish officials sought to play down any sense of crisis but said they were unable to explain what went wrong. Ebola outbreak Should travel restrictions be tougher? As Spain reports the first case of ebola contracted outside of West Africa, how can the disease be stopped from spreading? "We're investigating what was the source of the contact, verifying if all the established protocols were followed to the letter," Ana Mato, Spain's health minister, told a televised news conference. "Rest assured that we are taking all measures to guarantee the best medical care for the patient and the safety of the medical staff and the wider population," she added. The infected medical worker, whose name wasn't disclosed, was part of a team that treated Brother Manuel Garc a Viejo, a 69 year old Spanish missionary, before he died of Ebola on Sept. 25. He had been flown to Madrid three days earlier from Sierra Leone, where he served as medical director of a hospital. Health officials said the infected medical worker had been in contact once with Brother Garc a Viejo while he was alive and with his clothes after he died. "Something went wrong," M ximo Gonz lez Jurado, head of Spain's General Nursing Council, told the Spanish news agency EFE. "They need to establish if the protocol is correct or not correct so that a case like this, that never should have happened, doesn't happen again." An expanded version of this report appears on WSJ.com
BARCELONA, Spain A nurse in Spain has become the first health worker to be infected with the Ebola virus outside of West Africa, raising serious concerns about how prepared Western nations are to safely treat people with the deadly illness. The nurse contracted the illness while treating a Spanish missionary who was infected in Sierra Leone and flown to Madrid's Carlos III hospital, where he died on Sept. 25, Spain's Health Ministry said. The priest, Manuel Garc a Viejo, died three days after being flown back to Spain, and the nurse entered his room only twice, including once after his death, according to Antonio Alemany, a health official from the regional government of Madrid. The case is particularly worrisome to health experts because Spain is a developed country that is considered to possess the kind of rigorous infection control measures that should prevent disease transmission in the hospital. Although the Ebola epidemic has killed hundreds of doctors and nurses in West Africa, health officials in Europe and the United States have reassured the public repeatedly that if the disease reached their shores, their health care systems would be able to treat patients safely, without endangering health workers or the public. While the risk to hospital workers is thought to be far lower in developed countries, the infection of the Spanish nurse, along with the missteps in dealing with Ebola in Dallas, exposes weak spots in highly praised defense systems. Ana Mato, Spain's health minister, said in a televised news conference that the nurse, who has not been identified publicly, tested positive for Ebola twice, and that the rest of the 30 person team that looked after the missionary would be monitored to see if any of its members develop symptoms of Ebola. She said it was not clear how the nurse became infected. "It is certainly a sobering moment whenever we see a health care worker infected," said Abbigail Tumpey, a spokeswoman for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States. "It really highlights the need for rigorous infection control throughout everything health care workers are doing, starting with the triage of patients, getting patients into appropriate isolation and then appropriately treating and managing the patient. Any lapse could potentially expose somebody." Health officials in Spain said the team was properly equipped with protective gear, including gloves, gowns, masks and eye protection. The gear is meant to prevent exposure to bodily fluids, which spread the disease. But experts say the greatest risk comes from removing contaminated gear, which must be done according to a strict protocol to avoid infecting oneself. It takes training and practice. The case in Dallas, Ms. Tumpey added, has led the C.D.C. to redouble its efforts to urge hospitals to be on the lookout for potential cases and to handle them correctly. Ms. Mato, the Spanish health minister, said, "We are trying to determine whether all the health safety protocols have been followed." Infections among health care workers are "an alarming feature of this outbreak," according to the World Health Organization. As of Oct. 1, 382 health workers in West Africa have contracted the disease, including 216 who died. The high rate has been attributed largely to the lack of personal protective gear, disinfectants and running water in many hospitals and clinics. Doctors Without Borders, a group known for its meticulous attention to infection control and success in protecting its workers, also reported on Monday that one of its staff members caring for patients in Sierra Leone had contracted Ebola. The worker is to be airlifted to Europe for treatment, and the group said it is investigating the case to try to find out how the infection occurred. Another of its workers was also infected previously, but recovered. Situated close to the highway that circles the Spanish capital, the Carlos III hospital is tied to the much larger La Paz hospital in Madrid, but it was selected because it has long specialized in researching H.I.V. and other infectious as well as tropical diseases. In August, an entire floor of the hospital was sealed off and turned into an isolation unit, initially to treat Miguel Pajares, another Spanish priest who had been working in Africa and was the first European to be repatriated after being infected with Ebola. Father Pajares died on Aug. 12, five days after entering the special unit. In August, when the Spanish government decided to repatriate Father Pajares, the decision raised some concerns among local medical experts about whether Spain had adequate infrastructure to handle such a case. Daniel Bernab u, the president of Amyts, a Spanish union representing doctors, said at the time that the government decision was "political and not sanitary." He claimed that neither the government nor anybody else could "guarantee 100 percent that the virus wouldn't escape." On Monday, Mr. Bernab u told Efe, the Spanish national news agency, that even if Spain had the means to prevent Ebola spreading from the infected nurse as it has done in Africa, her case "should be used by all of us to think about whether we should host everybody and how to do it well." Ms. Mato urged people to remain calm, adding that "all the possible measures" were being taken to guarantee public health safety. Antonio Alemany, a health official from the regional government of Madrid, told the news conference that the nurse went on vacation a day after Father Garc a Viejo died. She got in touch with a medical center on Sept. 30 after feeling feverish, but had been leading "a normal life" while on vacation, he added, without giving details on her whereabouts during that period. Mr. Alemany said the nurse initially showed only "low symptoms" of illness, with a fever of roughly 100 degrees. He described her current condition as stable. He would not estimate how many people had contact with the nurse in the past two weeks, saying that a complete list was being drawn up. On the list is the nurse's husband, Mr. Alemany said she has no children. Spanish newspaper websites listed her age as either 40 or 44. She has been kept in isolation in a hospital in Alcorc n, on the outskirts of Madrid, but not in a unit specialized to treat infections like Ebola. She was transferred to the Carlos III hospital late Monday.
Brussels The EU said Tuesday it has asked Spain to explain how a nurse treating Ebola patients in Madrid contracted the deadly disease, the first known case of transmission outside Africa. The European Commission "sent a letter Monday to the Spanish health minister to obtain some clarification" of how this had happened, despite all the precautions taken, a spokesman said.
A hashtag translating as "we are all going to die" began trending in Spain after the country's health ministry confirmed what is believed to be the first case of a person becoming infected with Ebola outside Africa. Users took to social media to vent their frustration about the lack of information and criticised health minister Ana Mato, who came under intense scrutiny at a news conference on Monday evening, where she confirmed a nurse at Madrid's Carlos III hospital had tested positive for Ebola, but refused to take questions from reporters. Angry tweeters used the tag VAMOSAMORIRTODOS and wrote a series of comments including "We are all going to die before Ana Mato resigns" and "Ana Mato brought Ebola to Spain, now we're all going to die" soon after the emergency press conference wrapped up. Similar hashtags including AnaMatoDimision (Ana Mato must resign) began trending in Spain too. Yesterday, Ms Mato said the nurse had treated both Manuel Garcia and Miguel Pajares at the Carlos III hospital in Madrid. Mr Garcia, 69, died on 25 September after catching Ebola in Sierra Leone. Mr Pajares died in August after contracting the disease in Liberia. The nurse was admitted to Alcorcon hospital on Monday morning with possible symptoms of Ebola, including high fever. According to health protocols, medical personnel involved in looking after the two Ebola patients were expected to take their temperature twice a day for 21 days. Spain's health ministry is yet to provide information confirming the source of the infection, her whereabouts during the one week period in which she experienced high fever before being admitted to hospital on Monday and her holiday destination or the number of people she was in contact with. Her husband has now been placed in quarentine.
Two priests in closed ward infected nurse with the deadly disease, as worldwide hysteria over epidemic escalates. A Spanish nurse has become the first person to contract Ebola outside of Africa, the Spanish Health Ministry announced late Monday night, in the third documented case of Ebola in Europe. Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, is thought to have brought the disease to Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital in August, after he returned from a mission in heavily infected Liberia. Pajaras died on August 12 from the virus a second priest returning from Sierra Leone Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69 was treated at the same hospital and died last week. Now, the forty year old nurse who treated both priests has been diagnosed with symptoms of the disease, and is being treated in isolation in Alcorcon, a southern Madrid suburb. The nurse's condition is stable, Madrid's primary healthcare director, Antonio Alemany, stated Monday. Meanwhile, Spanish authorities have launched an investigation into the infection. "We are working to see if all the protocols which were established were strictly followed," Health Minister Ana Mato told the news conference. "Spain follows all the recommendations of the World Health Organization." The medical team monitoring the priests was closely watched throughout the process, Alemany said. To prevent further infection, Spanish officials are now tracing all contacts the nurse may have had, Marc Sprenger, director of the European Center for Disease Control and Prevention, told BBC. "It's extremely important," Sprenger stated. "We need to follow up all contacts in Europe and I'm sure that the Spanish authorities are doing this. It's a very serious business." Ebola has infected some 7,200 people worldwide, Reuters reported Monday, including five known cases in the US. Despite widespread hysteria over the disease, US President Barack Obama stated that he would not institute a travel ban on West African countries claiming that doing so would hinder the fight against the disease, not help.
The husband of a Spanish nurse who on Monday became the first person known to have contracted Ebola outside of Africa is now in quarantine in hospital, a Spanish health official said on Tuesday. The nurse, who had helped treat two Spanish priests after they were repatriated to Madrid having contracted Ebola in Africa, tested positive for the virus on Monday. "The husband is already in hospital and is being monitored so that he can have a quarantine situation with better monitoring," the civil servant in charge of Spain's health service, Mercedes Vinuesa, told a parliamentary committee. Vinuesa gave no details about some 30 colleagues of the nurse who also treated the missionaries who died of Ebola at the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid. A spokesman for the European Commission said the case, the first known case of Ebola spreading within a European country, would be discussed at a Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. Read MoreEbola could reach France, UK by end of October The nurse went on holiday immediately after the second of the missionaries she had been caring for died on Sept. 25. Spanish officials said she began feeling ill on Sept. 30 and was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday, but they have not yet said where she went on holiday. Jonathan Ball, a professor of molecular virology at Britain's University of Nottingham, said the Spanish nurse should not have contracted the deadly disease if appropriate containment and control measures had been taken. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again," he told Reuters.
Four people hospitalised in Madrid as experts say first transmission of the Ebola virus in Europe 'should not have happened' The first home grown European case of Ebola that was contracted by a Spanish nurse was avoidable, experts have said, as the EU demanded answers from Madrid. The healthworker, who is believed to have been carrying the deadly virus for more than a week before being diagnosed on Monday, was infected while caring for missionaries who had returned to Spain from Sierra Leone. On Monday night, Spain's Ministry of Health confirmed that the woman, whose name has not been made public, had tested positive for the virus the first person to contract Ebola outside of West Africa. Four people, including the nurse, were hospitalised and being monitored over suspicion of potential contagion of the deadly disease, Spain's health authorities said on Tuesday. Officials for Madrid's health system told a press conference those hospitalised included the nurse's husband, a traveller from one affected country and another health worker. Related Articles US plan more airport screenings for Ebola 06 Oct 2014 British American contracted Ebola 'cleaning infected car' 06 Oct 2014 British American TV cameraman contracts Ebola in Liberia 03 Oct 2014 Girlfriend of Ebola victim 'We are depending on God to save our lives' 03 Oct 2014 First case of Ebola diagnosed in US 30 Sep 2014 Dallas hospital quarantines patient with suspected Ebola 30 Sep 2014 They also said the nurse, who did not leave Madrid during her vacations, was currently being treated with a drip using antibodies from previous infected patients. Some 22 contacts of the nurse are being monitored for signs of infection. "If appropriate containment measures were adopted this really should not have happened," said Jonathan Ball, a virology professor at the University of Notthingham. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again." The Spanish government said the nurse contracted the disease after treating two patients who died at a Madrid hospital. The 44 year old woman is in a stable condition. The European Union has since demanded an explanation from Spain as to how she could have become infected. In comments to Britain's Science Media Centre, experts said protective suits worn by health workers, coupled with safe disposal of patients' bodily waste, substantially reduced the risk. "The recent report of a Spanish nurse who has contracted the virus... is of concern as it suggests that the barrier methods and training were not sufficient to protect healthcare workers and prevent secondary infection," said virology professor David Evans of the University of Warwick. Ben Neuman, an expert from the University of Reading, said investigators will have to look closely at the disposal of waste at the hospital where she worked. "Nurses face a problem in that a person who is sick with Ebola can make quite a lot of highly infectious waste, as the patient loses fluid through diarrhoea and vomiting," he said. "Those bodily fluids can contain millions of Ebola viruses, and it only takes one to transfer the infection." Another concern was that the nurse had gone on holiday the day after the second patient died on September 25, though authorities have not said where she went. After contracting the virus, it takes up to 21 days for a person to develop symptoms, which is when they become infectious. "Reality is that anyone who suspects that they have been exposed to the virus, unless they were properly protected from infection, should not travel until this 21 day incubation period has passed," said Mr Ball. Staff at the hospital where the Spanish nurse contracted the virus have also expressed concern that standards designed to keep the virus in check were not sufficient. According to a report in El Mundo, the protective suits issued to the medical team treating the missionaries were sub standard because they were not completely impermeable and did not include separate breathing apparatus. The case underlined the importance of following protection measures to a tee, experts said. But there was always a risk, however small. A tiny amount of Ebola containing liquid could splash on protective garments and be transferred to a person's skin, for example. "As the African outbreak perfectly illustrates, healthcare workers put their life on the line, so everything should be done to ensure that risks are minimised as much as possible," said Mr Ball. It was also a reminder that the risk of such sporadic exports will increase as more and more people become infected in West Africa. "That is why it is so important for the international community to ramp up their efforts to combat this deadly disease," Ball said. The infected nurse reportedly contacted health workers to tell them she was suffering from a low fever and fatigue a week before she was eventually diagnosed with Ebola. It wasn't until she presented herself at the emergency department of her local hospital in the early hours of Monday with a high fever that she was finally admitted and given tests to see if she had contracted the virus. Ebola, which is contracted through contact with infected bodily fluids, has killed more than 3,300 people in Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia. The delay in diagnosing the illness in the Spanish nurse has raised serious questions over the ability of Spain's health service to contain the virus after the controversial repatriation of the two elderly missionaries. Ana Mato, the Spanish Health Minister urged people to remain calm, insisting that "all possible measures" were in place to guarantee public safety. The coordinator of emergency health services at the Spanish Ministry of Health conceded that it would have been better to have admitted the nurse into hospital earlier. He said that although she hadn't presented the symptoms used by clinicians to initially suspect a case of Ebola, her recent history of having been in contact with the stricken missionaries meant it would have been preferable to err on the side of caution. " In this case it would have been better to have admitted her for observation on September 30 rather than wait for the more serious symptoms," said Fernando Simon. He confirmed that the husband of the nurse has now been put in isolation and is under observation although he has yet to show signs of feeling unwell. An investigation has been launched in an attempt to determine exactly how the nurse contracted the virus while working within strict guidelines set up at the specialist unit where the repatriated missionaries were treated. She had access to Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, the missionary who died on September 25, five days after being repatriated from Sierra Leone, on only two occasions, Madrid's health chief confirmed. The first was to treat him during his illness and the second was after he died when she entered the room to collect materials for disposal. The day after his death, the nurse went on holiday to a location that has not been made public by health authorities. Spain's health authorities are monitoring 22 people that may have been in close contact with the nurse, including medical colleagues and her husband.
Four people in Spain, including the nurse who tested for Ebola, have been hospitalised and are being monitored over suspicion of potential contagion. Officials for Madrid's health system told a press conference those hospitalised included the nurse's husband, a traveller from one affected country and another health worker. They also said the nurse, who did not leave Madrid during her vacations, was currently being treated with drip using antibodies from previous infected patients. The European Union has asked Spain to explain how the nurse contracted the deadly disease, the first known case of transmission outside Africa. The European Commission "sent a letter Monday to the Spanish health minister to obtain some clarification" of how this had happened, despite all the precautions taken, a spokesman said. Yesterday, Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato said an emergency protocol had been put in place and authorities were working to establish the source of the contagion, in the first case of Ebola being contracted outside of west Africa. "She is a health professional who took care of the infected with the disease who were repatriated and cared for at Carlos III" hospital, the director of Spain's public health department, Mercedes Vinuesa, told a news conference. The nurse began to feel sick on 30 September. She is said to be in a stable condition. She had treated Fr Manuel Garcia Viejo, 75, at the Madrid hospital when he was repatriated from Sierra Leone with the disease. Fr Garcia Viejo died days later, the second Spanish priest to die after being repatriated from Africa with the disease.
Four people, including the nurse who tested for Ebola on Monday, were hospitalized and being monitored over suspicion of potential contagion of the deadly disease, Spain's health authorities said on Tuesday. Officials for Madrid's health system told a press conference those hospitalized included the nurse's husband, a traveller from one affected country and another health worker. They also said the nurse, who did not leave Madrid during her vacations, was currently being treated with drip using antibodies from previous infected patients. EBOLA WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW The overall death toll from the epidemic reached 3,439 out of a total of 7,492 cases in West Africa and the United States as of Oct. 1, the World Health Organization said last week. SPAIN FIRST INFECTION WITHIN A EUROPEAN COUNTRY The nurse, who had helped treat two Spanish priests after they were repatriated to Madrid having contracted Ebola in Africa, tested positive for the virus on Monday. The civil servant in charge of Spain's health service, Mercedes Vinuesa, gave no details about some 30 colleagues of the nurse who also treated the missionaries who died of Ebola at the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid. A spokesman for the European Commission said the case, the first known case of Ebola spreading within a European country, would be discussed at a Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. The nurse went on holiday immediately after the second of the missionaries she had been caring for died on Sept. 25. Spanish officials said she began feeling ill on Sept. 30 and was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday, but they have not yet said where she went on holiday.
Staff at Madrid's Carlos III hospital say protective suits do not meet WHO standards as second nurse undergoes tests for virus Health professionals in Madrid have blamed substandard equipment and a failure to follow protocol for the first case of Ebola to be contracted outside west Africa. Health authorities announced on Monday that a Spanish nurse at Madrid's Carlos III hospital who treated a patient repatriated from Sierra Leone had twice tested positive for Ebola. Her husband had also been admitted to hospital and was in isolation, and a second nurse from the same team that treated both repatriated Ebola victims was also being tested. In this case, the nurse contacted the authorities on Monday complaining of a fever. She was in isolation in the Carlos III Hospital while authorities waited for the test results, a spokesperson for the Madrid regional government said. Staff at the hospital told El Pa s that the protective suits they were given did not meet World Health Organisation (WHO) standards, which specify that suits must be impermeable and include breathing apparatus. Staff also pointed to latex gloves secured with adhesive tape as an example of how the suits were not impermeable and noted that they did not have their own breathing equipment. The nurse was part of a team attending to missionary Manuel Garc a Viejo, 69, who died four days after being brought to Carlos III hospital on 20 September. The same team, including the nurse, also treated missionary Miguel Pajares, 75, who was repatriated from Liberia in August and died five days later. Staff at the hospital said waste from the rooms of both patients was carried out in the same elevator used by all personnel and, in the case of the second patient, the hospital was not evacuated. The European commission said on Tuesday it had written to the Spanish health minister "to obtain some clarification" on how the nurse had become infected when all EU member states were supposed to have taken measures to prevent transmission. "There is obviously a problem somewhere," the commission spokesman Fr d ric Vincent said. Spanish health authorities have said that professionals treating Ebola patients in Spain always follow WHO protocols. The nurse would have entered Garc a Viejo's room just twice, said Antonio Alemany, from the regional government of Madrid, both times wearing protective equipment. "We don't know yet what failed," Alemany said. "We are investigating the mechanism of infection." The nurse was in a stable condition. She had alerted the ministry of a slight fever on 30 September and been checked into a hospital in Alcorc n, on the outskirts of Madrid, with a high fever on Monday. The nurse, who is married with no children, was transferred to Carlos III hospital early on Tuesday morning. El Mundo reported that it was the nurse who asked to be tested for Ebola, having to insist repeatedly on being tested before it was done on Monday. While staff at the Alcorc n hospital were waiting for the test results, the nurse remained in a bed in the emergency room, separated only by curtains from other patients, hospital staff told El Mundo. Their version of events clashes with that of health authorities, who have said the patient was isolated from the first moment. The woman was on holiday at an unknown location when she began showing symptoms. "We are drawing up a list of all the people she may have been in contact with, including with health professionals at the Alcorc n hospital," said Alemany, estimating that more than 30 people were being monitored for any sign of symptoms. In August, Spain became the first European country in the current, fast spreading outbreak to evacuate patients for treatment. The decision prompted concern among health professionals, who said Spanish hospitals were not adequately equipped to handle Ebola.
Medical expert and relatives react to a nurse contracting Ebola in Spain, outside of the outbreak zone In West Africa A nurse in Spain has contracted Ebola, becoming the first person known to catch the disease outside the outbreak zone in West Africa during the current epidemic. The nurse's illness illustrates the danger health care workers face not only in poorly equipped West African clinics, but also in the more sophisticated medical centres of Europe and the United States. The Spanish nurse was transferred early on Tuesday to Madrid's Carlos III hospital and her husband was placed in quarantine. The nurse, whose name has not been released, was said to be in stable condition. She was part of the medical team that treated a 69 year old Spanish priest, Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died in the same hospital late last month, Spain's health minister said on Monday. Related Articles First European transmission of Ebola was 'avoidable' 07 Oct 2014 Spanish nurse first to contract Ebola in Europe 'had virus for a week' before being diagnosed 07 Oct 2014 Spanish nurse first to contract Ebola in Europe 06 Oct 2014 US plan more airport screenings for Ebola 06 Oct 2014 Is the Ebola case in Spain the tip of the iceberg? 07 Oct 2014 Nurse diagnosed with Ebola in Madrid 07 Oct 2014 The sick priest had been flown home from his post in Sierra Leone the nurse is believed to have contracted the virus from him. She went to a Madrid hospital with a fever on Sunday, 10 days after the priest died, and was placed in isolation. The World Health Organisation confirmed there has not been a previous transmission outside West Africa in the current outbreak. Speaking to Sky News, Professor John Sydney Oxford questioned how the nurse was infected when the necessary precautions should have been taken. "I was shocked to see that she got infected in the hospital," he said. But he added that he did not think the Spanish case meant the virus would become "embedded" outside of West Africa. The unprecedented Ebola outbreak this year has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, and become an escalating concern to the rest of the world. It has taken an especially devastating toll on health care workers, sickening or killing more than 370 in the hardest hit countries of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone places that already were short on doctors and nurses.
BARCELONA, Spain Spain intensified efforts on Tuesday to contain any spread of Ebola from an infected health worker as the government came under increased pressure from the political opposition and the European Union. The health worker, a nurse who has not been identified, was described as being in a stable condition. Her husband was quarantined, and monitoring was extended to medical staff who came into in contact with her. The nurse contracted the illness while treating a Spanish missionary who was infected in Sierra Leone and flown to Carlos III Hospital in Madrid. Opposition politicians said Tuesday that Ana Mato, the health minister, needed to explain any safety lapse, while some called for her immediate removal. Caridad Garc a lvarez, a lawmaker from the United Left party, wrote on Twitter that Ms. Mato needed to resign after ignoring warnings from health workers about inadequate safety measures. Instead of Ms. Mato, another official from the Health Ministry, Mar a Mercedes Vinuesa, appeared before Parliament on Tuesday, saying that a list was being drawn up of all the people who may have come into contact with the nurse. She said Spain had different treatments to deal with Ebola, but offered no further details. Amid recent tensions between Spanish medical staff and the government over spending cuts in the health sector, representatives of medical unions were quoted on Spanish news media websites as saying that austerity measures had left health workers poorly trained and ill equipped to handle an Ebola case. Carlos III Hospital had been specifically selected by Spain to welcome repatriated Ebola patients, and Yolanda Fuentes, a deputy director of the hospital, said Monday that the protective suits worn by health workers "comply perfectly with the protocol and the required protective measures for this disease." The European Commission wrote to the Madrid government requesting an explanation of how the nurse was infected, Agence France Presse reported, citing Fr d ric Vincent, a spokesman for the commission. A European health safety committee is set to meet on Wednesday to review the situation. Still, Mr. Vincent said it was "highly improbable" that the virus would spread further across Europe. As an assistant nurse, the woman who became infected had only twice entered the room of Manuel Garc a Viejo, a priest who died of Ebola, including once after his death, according to Antonio Alemany, a health official from the regional government of Madrid. On Tuesday, doctors at Carlos III Hospital were testing another nurse who was part of the team that treated the missionary for Ebola, after she showed possible symptoms, the newspaper El Mundo reported, citing unnamed hospital sources. The infected nurse is being treated using serum from a nun who survived Ebola after being infected in Liberia, the newspaper said. Some staff members are also being monitored for symptoms of Ebola at a hospital in Alcorc n, on the outskirts of Madrid, where the nurse spent most of Monday before being transferred to Carlos III Hospital shortly after midnight. The nurse came into contact with 21 medical staff members in Alcorc n, the newspaper El Pa s reported on Tuesday, citing unnamed hospital sources. The nurse was kept in isolation at Alcorc n, but the authorities could not rule out that she had come into contact with others before her tests came back positive, in a hospital that has no unit specialized to treat infections like Ebola.
The 40 year old woman and her husband are in isolation at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital and are reported to be in a stable condition The nurse is believed to be the first person to contract the disease outside of Africa in the current outbreak Two other people have been isolated because of fears they may have Ebola an nurse with diarrhoea but no fever, and a traveller who recently returned from Nigeria Spanish health authorities are currently investigating how the woman contracted the virus The EU has asked Spain for answers over the case 14 29 The New York Times has called the Madrid Ebola case "particularly particularly worrisome to health experts because Spain is a developed country that is considered to possess the kind of rigorous infection control measures that should prevent disease transmission in the hospital". 14 09 Health authorities are looking at protocols involving clothing worn by health professionals who treated Spanish missionary Manuel Garc a Viejo who died from Ebola in Madrid as they try and establish how a Spanish nurse contracted the disease, says Spain's director of public health Mercedes Vinuesa. 13 37 Some 200 staff at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital have gathered to call for the resignation of Spain's health minister Ana Mato AnaMatoDimision Concentraci n d trabajador s de H La Paz d Madrid exigiendo dimisi n d Ana Mat e Ignacio Gonz lez pic.twitter.com vhQ3leiFMI Podemos Sanidad ( podemosanidad) October 7, 2014 12 57 The nurse with Ebola is being treated with serum used by a nun who arrived in Spain on September 25th having recovered from the virus, the Spanish edition of the Huffington Post reports 12 45 The nurse with the disease "progressed well" on Monday night, but has asked that media outlets do not report on the state of her health. 12 42 In developed countries, an epidemic of Ebola is containable, Spanish health officials have said in a press conference. 12 40 "If appropriate containment measures were adopted this really should not have happened," said Jonathan Ball, a virology professor at the University of Nottingham has told news agency AFP. "The recent report of a Spanish nurse who has contracted the virus... is of concern as it suggests that the barrier methods and training were not sufficient to protect healthcare workers and prevent secondary infection," said virology professor David Evans of the University of Warwick. Ben Neuman, an expert from the University of Reading, said investigators will have to look closely at the disposal of waste at the hospital where she worked. "Nurses face a problem in that a person who is sick with Ebola can make quite a lot of highly infectious waste, as the patient loses fluid through diarrhoea and vomiting. Those bodily fluids can contain millions of Ebola viruses, and it only takes one to transfer the infection." 12 38 Health officials say Ebola can't be transmitted through casual contact. "Ebola contagion requires direct contact with bodily fluids, it's not casual contact," say the Director of Madrid's La Paz hospital Rafael P rez Santamarina. "It's only contagious when the patient has symptoms, and has fever," he adds. 11 00 The EU said on Tuesday it has asked Spain to explain how a nurse treating Ebola patients in Madrid contracted the deadly disease, the first known case of transmission outside Africa. The woman's husband has now also been hospitalized. The European Commission "sent a letter Monday to the Spanish health minister to obtain some clarification" of how this had happened, despite all the precautions taken, a spokesman said. The nurse and her husband are both currently in isolation at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III, Spain's El Mundo newspaper reported on Tuesday. The health worker is in a stable condition and is not at risk, according to Spanish press news agency Europa Press. Her husband is also "well" and "relatively calm," sources told the agency. Authorities in Spain are now investigating how the woman became infected with the virus and attempting to track down people she may have had contact with. This includes 21 people who wore involved in initial treatment of the woman at Madrid's Alcorc n Hospital. All of those staff will now be monitored by hospital authorities, according to Spain's El Pa s newspaper. The nurse arrived at Alcorc n Hospital in a normal ambulance on Monday and staff were not wearing any special protection, the daily added. The health of a further 30 health workers who had contact with two Spanish missionaries who died of the disease in Madrid is also being monitored by the health ministry, officials said on Monday. The nurse in the current case treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who was infected with Ebola in Liberia and died on August 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on September 25th. Both missionaries were members of the Hospital Order of San Juan de Dios, a Roman Catholic group that runs a charity working with Ebola victims in Africa. Those repatriations were deemed risky by a union that represents Spanish doctors, Amyts.
Nowa Paye, 9, is taken to an ambulance after showing signs of the Ebola infection in the village of Freeman Reserve, about 30 miles north of Monrovia, Liberia,Tuesday Sept. 30, 2014. A nurse in Spain, described as a "sanitary tech," has become the first person to contract the potentially deadly Ebola virus outside of West Africa, authorities said on Monday. Last month the woman treated the first European infected, a missionary who contracted the virus while working in Sierra Leona and who later died. The 75 year old priest had been in quarantine at Madrid's Carlos III hospital when he returned from Africa, and he died Sept. 25. The nurse entered the priest's room once upon his death. Get More at NBCNews.com
Scientists Calculate Ebola Could Reach France, UK by Late October Four people have been hospitalized in Spain to try to stem the spread of Ebola after a Spanish nurse became the first person in the world known to have contracted the virus outside of Africa, health authorities said on Tuesday. The nurse, who tested positive for the virus on Monday, her husband, who is showing no symptoms of the disease, and two other people are being closely monitored in hospital, health officials told a news conference in Madrid. One of those hospitalized is a health worker who has diarrhea but no fever. The other is a Spaniard who traveled from Nigeria, said Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital where the infected nurse treated two Spanish missionaries who contracted the disease in Africa. With concerns growing around the world of the Ebola pandemic spreading beyond West Africa, the Spanish officials sought to reassure the public that they were tackling the threat. 22 others being monitored Twenty two people who came into contact with the nurse are being monitored, Perez Santamaria said. They have not been isolated but they are having their temperature taken twice a day to check for signs of infection. Officials said they were still investigating how the nurse was infected. She went on holiday after the second of the missionaries she had been caring for died on Sept. 25, although, they stressed, she had not left Madrid. She began feeling ill on Sept. 30 and was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday. "This has taken us by surprise," said Perez Santamaria. "We are revising our protocols, improving them." A spokesman for the European Commission said the case would be discussed at an EU Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. 'Crucial to find out what went wrong' Jonathan Ball, a professor of molecular virology at Britain's University of Nottingham, said the nurse should not have contracted the deadly disease if appropriate containment and control measures had been taken. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again," he told Reuters. The nurse is being treated with antibodies from previous infected patients, Perez Santamaria said.
Madrid Four people have been hospitalised in Spain to try to stem the spread of Ebola after a Spanish nurse became the first person in the world known to have contracted the virus outside of Africa, health authorities said on Tuesday. The nurse, who tested positive for the virus on Monday, her husband, who is showing no symptoms of the disease, and two other people are being closely monitored in hospital, health officials told a news conference in Madrid. One of those hospitalised is a health worker who has diarrhoea but no fever. The other is a Spaniard who travelled from Nigeria, said Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital where the infected nurse treated two Spanish missionaries who contracted the disease in Africa. With concerns growing around the world of the Ebola pandemic spreading beyond West Africa, the Spanish officials sought to reassure the public that they were tackling the threat. Twenty two people who came into contact with the nurse are being monitored, Perez Santamaria said. They have not been isolated but they are having their temperature taken twice a day to check for signs of infection. Officials said they were still investigating how the nurse was infected. She went on holiday after the second of the missionaries she had been caring for died on Sept. 25, although, they stressed, she had not left Madrid. She began feeling ill on Sept. 30 and was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday. "This has taken us by surprise," said Perez Santamaria. "We are revising our protocols, improving them." A spokesman for the European Commission said the case would be discussed at an EU Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. Jonathan Ball, a professor of molecular virology at Britain's University of Nottingham, said the nurse should not have contracted the deadly disease if appropriate containment and control measures had been taken. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again," he told Reuters. The nurse is being treated with antibodies from previous infected patients, Perez Santamaria said.
THE first homegrown European case of Ebola, in a Spanish nurse, was avoidable, virologists say as the EU demanded answers from Madrid. Though there is always a threat to health workers of infection with the virus spread through contact with body fluids, the risk is small and well understood and existing protections effective, the specialists said on Tuesday. "If appropriate containment measures were adopted this really should not have happened," said Jonathan Ball, a virology professor at the University of Notthingham. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again." The Spanish government said on Monday a nurse had contracted the haemorrhagic fever after treating two patients who died at a Madrid hospital both missionaries infected in West Africa, where Ebola has claimed more than 3400 lives. The European Union on Tuesday demanded an explanation from Spain as to how she could have become infected. In comments to Britain's Science Media Centre, experts said protective suits worn by health workers, coupled with safe disposal of patients' bodily waste, substantially reduced the risk. "The recent report of a Spanish nurse who has contracted the virus ... is of concern as it suggests that the barrier methods and training were not sufficient to protect healthcare workers and prevent secondary infection," said virology professor David Evans of the University of Warwick. Ben Neuman, an expert from the University of Reading, said investigators will have to look closely at the disposal of waste at the hospital where she worked. "Nurses face a problem in that a person who is sick with Ebola can make quite a lot of highly infectious waste, as the patient loses fluid through diarrhoea and vomiting. Those bodily fluids can contain millions of Ebola viruses, and it only takes one to transfer the infection." Another concern was that the nurse had gone on holiday the day after the second patient died on September 25, though authorities have not said where she went. After contracting the virus, it takes up to 21 days for a person to develop symptoms, which is when they become infectious. "Reality is that anyone who suspects that they have been exposed to the virus, unless they were properly protected from infection, should not travel until this 21 day incubation period has passed," said Prof Ball. The case underlined the importance of following protection measures to a tee, the experts said. But there was always a risk, however small. A tiny amount of Ebola containing liquid could splash on protective garments and be transferred to a person's skin, for example. "As the African outbreak perfectly illustrates, healthcare workers put their life on the line, so everything should be done to ensure that risks are minimised as much as possible," said Prof Ball. It was also a reminder that the risk of such sporadic exports will increase as more and more people become infected in West Africa. "That is why it is so important for the international community to ramp up their efforts to combat this deadly disease," Prof Ball said.
By Inmaculada Sanz and Sarah Morris MADRID, Oct 7 (Reuters) Four people have been hospitalized in Spain to try to stem the spread of Ebola after a Spanish nurse became the first person in the world known to have contracted the virus outside of Africa, health authorities said on Tuesday. The nurse, who tested positive for the virus on Monday, her husband, who is showing no symptoms of the disease, and two other people are being closely monitored in hospital, health officials told a news conference in Madrid. One of those hospitalized is a health worker who has diarrhea but no fever. The other is a Spaniard who traveled from Nigeria, said Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital where the infected nurse treated two Spanish missionaries who contracted the disease in Africa. With concerns growing around the world of the Ebola pandemic spreading beyond West Africa, the Spanish officials sought to reassure the public that they were tackling the threat. Twenty two people who came into contact with the nurse are being monitored, Perez Santamaria said. They have not been isolated but they are having their temperature taken twice a day to check for signs of infection. Officials said they were still investigating how the nurse was infected. She went on holiday after the second of the missionaries she had been caring for died on Sept. 25, although, they stressed, she had not left Madrid. She began feeling ill on Sept. 30 and was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday. "This has taken us by surprise," said Perez Santamaria. "We are revising our protocols, improving them." A spokesman for the European Commission said the case would be discussed at an EU Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. Jonathan Ball, a professor of molecular virology at Britain's University of Nottingham, said the nurse should not have contracted the deadly disease if appropriate containment and control measures had been taken. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again," he told Reuters. The nurse is being treated with antibodies from previous infected patients, Perez Santamaria said. (Additional reporting by Kate Kelland in London and Philip Blenkinsop in Brussels Editing by Julien Toyer and Robin Pomeroy)
MADRID (Reuters) Four people have been hospitalized in Spain to try to stem the spread of Ebola after a Spanish nurse became the first person in the world known to have contracted the virus outside of Africa, health authorities said on Tuesday. The nurse, who tested positive for the virus on Monday, her husband, who is showing no symptoms of the disease, and two other people are being closely monitored in hospital, health officials told a news conference in Madrid. One of those hospitalized is a health worker who has diarrhea but no fever. The other is a Spaniard who traveled from Nigeria, said Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital where the infected nurse treated two Spanish missionaries who contracted the disease in Africa. With concerns growing around the world of the Ebola pandemic spreading beyond West Africa, the Spanish officials sought to reassure the public that they were tackling the threat. Twenty two people who came into contact with the nurse are being monitored, Perez Santamaria said. They have not been isolated but they are having their temperature taken twice a day to check for signs of infection. Officials said they were still investigating how the nurse was infected. She went on holiday after the second of the missionaries she had been caring for died on Sept. 25, although, they stressed, she had not left Madrid. She began feeling ill on Sept. 30 and was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday. "This has taken us by surprise," said Perez Santamaria. "We are revising our protocols, improving them." A spokesman for the European Commission said the case would be discussed at an EU Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. Jonathan Ball, a professor of molecular virology at Britain's University of Nottingham, said the nurse should not have contracted the deadly disease if appropriate containment and control measures had been taken. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again," he told Reuters. The nurse is being treated with antibodies from previous infected patients, Perez Santamaria said. (Additional reporting by Kate Kelland in London and Philip Blenkinsop in Brussels Editing by Julien Toyer and Robin Pomeroy)
Four people, including the nurse who tested for Ebola on Monday, were hospitalized and being monitored over suspicion of potential contagion of the deadly disease, Spain's health authorities said on Tuesday. Officials for Madrid's health system told a press conference those hospitalized included the nurse's husband, a traveller from one affected country and another health worker. They also said the nurse, who did not leave Madrid during her vacations, was currently being treated with drip using antibodies from previous infected patients. EBOLA WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW The overall death toll from the epidemic reached 3,439 out of a total of 7,492 cases in West Africa and the United States as of Oct. 1, the World Health Organization said last week. SPAIN FIRST INFECTION WITHIN A EUROPEAN COUNTRY The nurse, who had helped treat two Spanish priests after they were repatriated to Madrid having contracted Ebola in Africa, tested positive for the virus on Monday. The civil servant in charge of Spain's health service, Mercedes Vinuesa, gave no details about some 30 colleagues of the nurse who also treated the missionaries who died of Ebola at the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid. A spokesman for the European Commission said the case, the first known case of Ebola spreading within a European country, would be discussed at a Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. The nurse went on holiday immediately after the second of the missionaries she had been caring for died on Sept. 25. Spanish officials said she began feeling ill on Sept. 30 and was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday, but they have not yet said where she went on holiday. NEW YORK ACTORS TEST HOSPITALS WITH PHONY EBOLA SYMPTOMS Public hospitals in New York are concerned enough about Ebola that they've secretly been sending actors with mock symptoms into emergency rooms to test how good the triage staff is at identifying and isolating possible cases. Twenty four patients in New York have been put into isolation over the past eight weeks in city owned hospitals because of fears they might have Ebola, according to Dr. Ross Wilson, the chief medical officer at the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation. None had the disease (some patients had malaria and one had typhoid), but Wilson said the point has been to isolate possible cases quickly so there is no chance for the virus to spread. Some staff has been retrained on how to properly put on and remove protective gear. At the city's flagship public hospital, Bellevue Hospital Center, technicians are assembling a lab that will exclusively handle Ebola blood tests so that samples won't contaminate equipment in other parts of the hospital. A small number of beds have been set up in an isolation ward for taking confirmed cases. So far, nobody has had to use it. City 911 operators have been told to ask certain people calling for an ambulance whether they've been to West Africa recently. Ebola has yet to infect a single person on U.S. soil the one confirmed case involves a man who contracted the virus overseas. But health care providers are worried enough that they are taking a wide variety of precautions. It isn't yet clear whether those preparations are overkill, or not nearly enough. But medical officials and health experts say that, at the very least, the scare is giving them a chance to reinforce and test infection control procedures. "The attention has been, in a sad way, very helpful," said Dr. Richard Wenzel, an epidemiologist at Virginia Commonwealth University and a former president of the International Society for Infectious Diseases.
BARCELONA, Spain A nurse in Spain has become the first health worker to be infected with the Ebola virus outside of West Africa, raising serious concerns about how prepared Western nations are to safely treat people with the deadly illness. The nurse, contracted the illness while treating a Spanish missionary who was infected in Sierra Leone and flown to Madrid's Carlos III hospital, where he died on Sept. 25, Spain's Health Ministry said. The priest, Manuel Garc a Viejo, died three days after being flown back to Spain, and the nurse entered his room only twice, including once after his death, according to Antonio Alemany, a health official from the regional government of Madrid. Ana Mato, Spain's health minister, said in a televised news conference that the nurse, who has not been identified publicly, tested positive for Ebola twice, and that the rest of the 30 person team that looked after the missionary would be monitored to see if any of its members develop symptoms of Ebola. She said it was not clear how the nurse became infected. (The New York Times)
A Madrid nurse who became the first person to contract ebola outside of Africa is being treated with antibodies from survivors of the illness, hospital officials have revealed. Four people, also including her husband, have been placed in quarantine at the hospital over fears they may also have the deadly virus. The nurse was part of a medical team at the city's La Paz Carlos III hospital that treated two Spanish missionaries who died shortly after returning from Africa with the disease. A second nurse who also helped treat an infected priest is among the four being monitored by health workers, as is a man who arrived on a flight from Nigeria displaying symptoms. Spain's health authorities said they had been in touch with a total of 22 people who are thought to have been in contact with the 40 year old nurse, whose name has not been released. They are also monitoring around 30 other members of the health care team that treated one of the missionaries. Officials added that although the nurse began a holiday after one of the missionaries she had been caring for died on 25 September, she did not leave Madrid during this time. She began feeling ill on 30 September and was diagnosed with ebola on Monday, but is in a stable condition. EU countries have demanded an explanation from Spain's health minister as to how the nurse caught the disease, despite all the precautions taken A spokesman said a letter sent to the health minister sought "to obtain some clarification" from Spanish authorities, adding "The priority remains to find out what actually happened." Spain's health minister, Ana Mato, said an emergency protocol is in place and that authorities are working to establish the source of the contagion at the Madrid hospital. "We are working to guarantee the safety of all citizens," she said. In the US, President Barack Obama says airport screening measures are being stepped up in the country to help identify people who might have the deadly virus. More than 3,400 people have died in the latest ebola outbreak, which has swept through West African countries Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone and Nigeria. Meanwhile, the British Army said more than 100 British Army medics were being sent to Sierra Leone to help tackle the ebola crisis within the next few weeks. Personnel from the 22 Field Hospital have been undergoing an extensive training exercise in full protective suits, with simulated casualties in make up. They will staff a field hospital set up specifically to treat medics who have caught the disease, not members of the general public. An Army spokeswoman said "They are going through all their procedures and getting atuned to wearing their personal protective equipment, working in quite hot temperatures." Experts say quarantine systems in developed countries including the UK, US and Spain mean the disease is very unlikely to spread to the same extent seen in poor African countries.
An ambulance outside Alcorcon Hospital near Madrid transfers a Spanish nurse who contracted Ebola, Oct. 7, 2014. She was the first person to become infected with the virus outside of Africa, casting doubt over measures taken in Spain to control the potential spread of the deadly disease. Reuters A Spanish nurse who is the first person to have contracted Ebola outside of West Africa is being treated with a drip of antibodies from patients previously infected with the virus, according to Reuters. The nurse helped treat two Spanish priests who had contracted Ebola in Africa and was diagnosed with the deadly disease on Monday. Authorities have hospitalized and are monitoring three people, including the nurse's husband, who were in close contact with the nurse for signs of infection, Spanish health officials said. Another health worker and a traveler who spent time in West Africa were among the three people who were hospitalized. The 44 year old Spanish nurse, whose name has not been released, is married with no children. She was part of a team that treated a Spanish missionary and a Spanish priest, both of whom died after returning to Spain with Ebola. The nurse reportedly went on vacation after the second priest she was caring for died on Sept. 25. She began showing symptoms of Ebola five days later. Her infection has raised doubts about whether appropriate measures were taken to contain the virus and keep health workers healthy. "Something went wrong," M ximo Gonz lez Jurado, head of Spain's General Nursing Council, told Spanish news agency EFE. "They need to establish if the protocol is correct or not correct so that a case like this, that never should have happened, doesn't happen again." The U.S. is the only other country outside of Africa to report a case of Ebola. Thomas Eric Duncan, a Liberian national who had flown to the U.S. to marry his girlfriend, was diagnosed with Ebola in Dallas last week and is in critical condition. He is being treated with a medication called brincidofovir, according to officials from the hospital where Duncan is receiving treatment.
Nurse with first infection outside of Africa, husband and two others held in isolation in attempt to prevent spread. Spain has quarantined a total of four people in an attempt to prevent the spread of Ebola after a nurse became the first confirmed case of infection outside West Africa. The 40 year old nurse, her husband, another health worker and a Spaniard who travelled to Nigeria are in isolation in hospital, Madrid health officials said on Tuesday. The husband shows no symptoms, and the health worker has diarrhoea but no fever. There was no information about the condition of the fourth person. One of the four has tested negative for the disease, the Reuters news agency reportedon Tuesday, citing a Spanish health official. It was not clear who of the four was tested. Rafael Perez Santamaria, the head of the Carlos III Hospital, said a further 22 people who had been in with the nurse contact were being monitored. The nurse had treated a 75 year old Spanish missionary who had caught the disease in Liberia, and a 69 year old priest who caught Ebola in Sierra Leone. Both missionaries died, the first on August 12 and the second on September 25. The nurse fell ill on September 30, and officials said she entered the room of the second patient twice. "This has taken us by surprise," said Perez Santamaria. "We are revising our protocols, improving them. The priority remains to find out what actually happened." The health ministry's chief coordinator for health alerts and emergencies, Fernando Simon, told local radio that there was a small chance that people who had come into contact with the nurse may have contracted the disease. A small number of public health workers demonstrated in Madrid over the infection, and the danger faced by hospital staff. "This is not a game to be played in the way they have done. It is a very worrying matter and they have not handled it correctly," a nursing assistant at Madrid's La Paz hospital, which one of the missionaries had visited. A cardiologist at the hospital added "We cannot understand how someone who was wearing a double protection suit and two pairs of gloves could have been contaminated."
BARCELONA, Spain A Spanish nurse has become the first person to be infected with Ebola outside West Africa after contracting the virus while treating a missionary who died in a Madrid hospital, Spain's health ministry said Monday. The assistant nurse was part of the medical team at Madrid's Carlos III hospital that treated Manuel Garc a Viejo, the missionary, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone but then died in the Madrid hospital on Sept. 25. Ana Mato, Spain's health minister, told a televised news conference that the nurse tested positive for Ebola twice, and that the rest of the 30 person team that looked after the missionary were undergoing medical tests to determine whether they had contracted Ebola. The nurse, whose name was not disclosed, worked in the Carlos III hospital that had been specially selected and prepared to treat August Miguel Pajares, another Spanish priest who had been working in Africa and was the first European to be repatriated after being infected with Ebola. Pajares died Aug. 12, five days after entering the special unit of the Carlos III hospital. Mato, the health minister, would not discuss how a staff member could have contracted Ebola while working in a hospital specially equipped to handle such a dangerous virus. "We are trying to determine whether all the health safety protocols have been followed," she said. Mato urged people to remain calm, adding that "all the possible measures" were being taken to guarantee public health safety. Antonio Alemany, a health official from the regional government of Madrid, told the news conference that the nurse went on vacation a day after Garc a Viejo died. She got in touch with a medical center on Sept. 30, after feeling feverish, but had been leading "a normal life" while on vacation, he added, without giving details on her whereabouts during that period. Alemany said the nurse initially showed only "low symptoms" of illness, with a fever of roughly 100 degrees Fahrenheit. He described her current condition as stable, after the Ebola infection was confirmed in two separate tests. He would not estimate how many people had contact with the nurse in the past two weeks, saying that a complete list was being drawn up. On the list is the nurse's husband, Alemany said, but she has no children. She is 44, according to the website of El Pa s, the Spanish newspaper, which cited unidentified medical sources. The nurse had direct access to Garc a Viejo on two occasions, Alemany said, one of which occurred after his death Sept. 25. Garc a Viejo, 69, had been repatriated three days earlier from Sierra Leone. The nurse was kept in isolation in a hospital in Alcorc n, on the outskirts of Madrid, but not in a unit specialized to treat infections like Ebola. She was expected to be transferred to the Carlos III hospital late Monday.
Spain has quarantined a total of four people in an attempt to prevent the spread of Ebola after a nurse became the first confirmed case of infection outside West Africa. The 40 year old nurse, her husband, another health worker and a Spaniard who travelled to Nigeria are in isolation in hospital, Madrid health officials said on Tuesday. The husband shows no symptoms, and the health worker has diarrhoea but no fever. There was no information about the condition of the fourth person. One of the four has tested negative for the disease, the Reuters news agency reportedon Tuesday, citing a Spanish health official. It was not clear who of the four was tested. Rafael Perez Santamaria, the head of the Carlos III Hospital, said a further 22 people who had been in with the nurse contact were being monitored. The nurse had treated a 75 year old Spanish missionary who had caught the disease in Liberia, and a 69 year old priest who caught Ebola in Sierra Leone. Both missionaries died, the first on August 12 and the second on September 25. The nurse fell ill on September 30, and officials said she entered the room of the second patient twice. "This has taken us by surprise," said Perez Santamaria. "We are revising our protocols, improving them. The priority remains to find out what actually happened." The health ministry's chief coordinator for health alerts and emergencies, Fernando Simon, told local radio that there was a small chance that people who had come into contact with the nurse may have contracted the disease. A small number of public health workers demonstrated in Madrid over the infection, and the danger faced by hospital staff. "This is not a game to be played in the way they have done. It is a very worrying matter and they have not handled it correctly," a nursing assistant at Madrid's La Paz hospital, which one of the missionaries had visited. A cardiologist at the hospital added "We cannot understand how someone who was wearing a double protection suit and two pairs of gloves could have been contaminated."
Animal lovers denounce authorities' request to put down Excalibur over fears that dog may be carrying Ebola virus The husband of the Spanish nurse infected with Ebola has launched an online campaign to save the couple's dog, after health authorities told him it would have to be put down. In a note distributed on social media by several animal protection organisations, Javier Lim n Romero said health officials had asked for his consent to put down the dog Exc libur. "I said no. And they told me that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and put him down," Romero said in the note. The appeal was sent from Lim n Romero's isolation ward in the Carlos III Hospital where his wife, Teresa Romero Ramos, is also in quarantine. The dog is currently at home alone, he said, but noted that before going to the hospital he set out "several buckets of water, filled the bathtub with water and left out 15kg of feed. "The terrace was also left open so that he could do his business," he said. Lim n Romero dismissed the authorities' worries that the dog may be carrying the Ebola virus, arguing that Exc libur would not infect anyone. "If it bothers them so much then they should find other alternative solutions, such as putting the dog in quarantine and observation, as they have done with me." He added "But of course a dog is easier, it doesn't matter as much." His plea spread quickly across the internet, with the hashtag SalvemosAExcalibur, or Let's save Excalibur, dominating Twitter. By Tuesday evening, more than 135,000 had people signed an online petition backing his plea.
Javier Limon Romero who is quarantined because his wife Teresa has the killer disease has asked an animal welfare group to stop his dog being killed by Spanish authorities The husband of the Spanish nurse infected with Ebola has attacked health chiefs in Madrid for threatening to put down their pet dog. Teresa Romero Ramos and Javier Limon Romero are being held in quarantine in separate rooms at the same hospital in the Spanish capital. Teresa, 44, one of the medical team that treated the two repatriated Spanish priests who died from Ebola, was diagnosed with the killer disease on Monday. Today, husband Javier, who is being looked after at the Carlos III Hospital, forwarded a message from his hospital room claiming health chiefs in Madrid want to put down their pet dog Excalibur. Javier, who lives in the Madrid suburb of Alcorcon, raged "I want to publicly denounce a man called Zarco, who I think is Head of Health for the community of Madrid and who's told me that I have my dog put down. He's asked for my consent and I've denied it, to which he responded that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and have it put down. "Before leaving hospital I left several buckets of water out for it as well as filling the bath with water, along with a 15 kilo sack of food. "I also left the door to the terrace open so it could do it necessities. "It seems unfair to me that because of a mistake they've made, they want to solve this the easy way. "A dog doesn't have to infect a person and vice versa." "If this problem worries them so much I think they should look for another type of alternative solution, such as putting the dog in quarantine and observation like they've down with me. Or perhaps they feel they should put me down just in case? Of course a dog is easier, it doesn't matter as much." According to a document sent by officials in Madrid, although dogs can't contract Ebola, it is possible they can transmit the virus to humans. It reads "The existence of the pet dog which has been living with the patient infected with the Ebola virus, according to the scientific findings available, presents a possible risk of transmission of the disease to humans. The revelation has sparked fury among dog lovers in Spain. An online petition has already collected calling for the dog to be saved has already attracted more than 65,000 signatures. Bea Espinosa, a helper at the Villa Pepa Animal Welfare Centre in Avila north of Madrid, said "Javier sent the message to friends and colleagues. "A nurse that works with his wife passed it on to us with a message asking us to put the appeal out on the Internet. "I spoke to Javier before publicising it and he confirmed it was a genuine message and he wanted it to go out on social networking sites." Several Spanish newspaper posted his appeal on their websites today, identifying Zarko as Julio Zarco, the new Head of Patient Care for Madrid's regional government's Department of Health. Despite being in quarantine, respected Spanish daily El Mundo managed to get a quick phone interview with the Spanish nurse's husband in hospital which they posted on their website. He sounded fit and in good health during their five minute chat. As well as complaining about the risk to his dog, he told the paper "My wife has been working normally and has followed all the normal protocols. "We've no idea how she could have been infected. "She's never appeared worried about anything. We were going to go on holiday and couldn't because of an accident I had at work. "She volunteered to help the second priest who died from Ebola. She was on the rota when the first patient arrived but volunteered second time round." One of four people being monitored in hospital for Ebola in Spain has tested negative for the disease. The person cleared in the tests is a female health worker, who had diarrhoea but no fever, and who was hospitalised along with three others as Spain tries to stem the spread of Ebola. Poll loading ...
The dog of a Spanish woman with Ebola will be killed by Madrid's regional government to contain the possible spread of the deadly disease. Reuters As health officials try to contain the spread of Ebola, Madrid's regional government will euthanize the dog of a Spanish nursing assistant after she became infected with the deadly disease, the Associated Press reported Tuesday. A court order was passed, despite the family's objections, since there is a chance the pet could transmit the fatal virus to humans. The nursing assistant, whose name has not been revealed due to privacy concerns, was the first person to become infected with the virus outside West Africa. She contracted Ebola after she cared for a priest who contracted the virus in Sierra Leone and died last month. There is some evidence that suggests dogs can contract Ebola and can infect humans, NBC News wrote. As a result, "biosecurity" measures are being taken to make sure such a transmission does not occur, the AP added. The dog, which is a mixed breed called "Excalibur," will be euthanized in a manner so it will not suffer. Its body will be incinerated, according to the government. A laboratory technician of the company Icon Genetics prepares proteins from tobacco plants (Nicotiana benthamiana) for weighing in a laboratory in Halle, Aug. 14, 2014. Icon Genetics develops a technology to mass produce Ebola vaccine with the help of tobacco plants. Reuters Axel Schmidt Even though the court order has already been passed in Madrid, there are thousands of people who do not want to see the animal killed. A petition has been started on Change.org and people are asking the government to let the dog live. The petition, started by Carmen Sanchez Monta es, was written in Spanish, English and Finnish. Nearly 90,000 people have signed. "If this woman were to die, the dog which has accompanied them for so many years would be an important emotional support for her husband," the petition reads, in part. "This is not 'just' a dog, for this couple he is one of the family." The woman might have contracted Ebola due to substandard equipment and not following proper protocol, the Guardian reported. However, the Associated Press said she wore a hazmat suit both times she treated the infected priest and records said she was not accidentally exposed to the virus, which is spread through direct contact with the bodily fluids of a person who is infected. More than 3,400 people in West Africa have been killed by the latest outbreak. It's thought the virus has spread in Africa though contact with infected bats and handling "bushmeat," which is the meat of African wild animals. Follow me on Twitter mariamzzarella
The husband of the Spanish nursing assistant infected with ebola has launch an internet appeal through several animal protection organizations to stop authorities from destroying the couple's dog. The pet, named Exc libur, has been left on his own at home after owners Javier L. R. and Teresa R. R were admitted to hospital in Madrid on Monday. Through friends, the couple managed to get a message to the AXLA (Amig sXlosanimales) animal association, who distributed the appeal via Facebook and other animal charities. This is the message he published on Facebook "Hello, my name is Javier L. R. surname supplied . I am the husband of Teresa R. R. surname supplied , the nursing assistant infected with ebola for voluntarily treating the two infected patients who were repatriated to Spain. I want to publicly condemn that a certain Zarco, who I think is the health chief for the Madrid region, has told me that they have to put down my dog, just like that, without further ado. He has asked for my consent, which I have categorically denied. He says that they will therefore request a judicial order to break into my house and destroy him. Before going to the hospital I left him several buckets of water, the bath tub also full of water, and a 15kg bag of feed, so he had food and water. I also left the terrace open so he could do his business. It seems unfair to me that because of their mistake, they want to solve this the quick way. A dog will not pass anything on to another person, and the same goes the other way around. If this problem worries them so much, I think other alternative solutions can be found, such as, for example, putting the dog in quarantine and observation, as they have done with me. Or maybe they will have to put me down, just in case. But, of course, a dog is easier, it doesn't matter as much." The ability of dogs to spread the ebola virus has been little studied, but a statement issued in 2005 by the IRD development research institute in Paris noted that they "may infect and excrete the virus for a determined period, thus becoming a potential source of infection for humans."
Madrid Health authorities on Tuesday ordered the death of the dog owned by a Spanish health worker infected with Ebola in Madrid, triggering a campaign to save him by her husband and animal rights activists. The husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine, contacted local media to object to the decision by Madrid's department of health. "They told me that if I didn't give authorisation, they would get a judicial order to enter my home by force and sacrifice the dog," he told El Mundo newspaper. The authorities said in a statement there was a risk the dog could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Romero said the dog, Excalibur, was isolated at home with a stockpile of food and water and could relieve himself outside. The story triggered a petition and some heated responses on Twitter, under the hashtag SalvemosAExcalibur ( SaveExcalibur). Animal rights group Pacma said there was no evidence of the Ebola virus being transmitted from dogs to humans. "He should be examined and placed in quarantine, and treated if necessary," said Javier Moreno, a co founder of Pacma.
Spanish health authorities have ordered the death of the dog owned by a health worker infected with Ebola in Madrid. Health authorities have ordered the death of the dog owned by a Spanish health worker infected with Ebola in Madrid, triggering a campaign to save him by her husband and animal rights activists. The husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine, contacted local media to object to the decision by Madrid's department of health. "They told me that if I didn't give authorisation, they would get a judicial order to enter my home by force and sacrifice the dog," he told El Mundo newspaper. The authorities said in a statement there was a risk the dog could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Romero said the dog, Excalibur, was isolated at home with a stockpile of food and water and could relieve himself outside. The story triggered a petition and some heated responses on Twitter, under the hashtag SalvemosAExcalibur ( SaveExcalibur). Animal rights group Pacma said there was no evidence of the Ebola virus being transmitted from dogs to humans. "He should be examined and placed in quarantine, and treated if necessary," said Javier Moreno, a co founder of Pacma.
Madrid's regional government says it's going to kill the pet dog of a Spanish woman who became infected with Ebola. Authorities said in a statement that available scientific knowledge indicates there's a risk the dog could transmit the deadly virus to humans. Read more Spain Ebola threat Three more hospitalised The Spanish nursing assistant became the first case of Ebola being transmitted outside of West Africa after she cared for a Spanish priest in Madrid who died of Ebola last month. She and her husband are now in quarantine. The government said the dog, named Excalibur, would be euthanized in a way to avoid suffering and using bio security measures that it did not specify. Its body will later be incinerated. The government had to get a court order for the euthanisation over the family's objection
Authorities in Spain plan to euthanize the dog of a nurse diagnosed with Ebola, but her husband, who is in quarantine, is trying to save the family pet. Javier Limon Romero not only has to worry about his wife Teresa Romero Ramos, who caught Ebola after she helped treat a priest who died from the disease but also their dog, Excalibur. Madrid Health officials issued an order Tuesday for the dog to be euthanized, despite Romero's plea on Facebook to spare his pet's life and instead, quarantine the animal. A Change.org petition has garnered nearly 141 thousand signatures in support of quarantine, with signers making comments like, "Please don't let innocents pay for human errors" and "I'm fed up with animals being treated like mere objects in this country ..." A study on the CDC website shows that dogs can be infected with Ebola, but are asymptomatic. Romero said in his Facebook post that he left the dog with food, water and access to the outdoors while he is in quarantine and his wife is in the hospital.
The nurse's husband said he received a phone call and was asked for authorisation to kill the pet(Facebook) Spanish authorities plan to kill the dog of the nurse who tested positive to Ebola in Madrid. The woman's husband, who has been put in quarantine, said in an interview with Spanish newspaper El Mundo that he was asked to give authorisation to kill the pet, after fears spread that he might have contracted the virus too. "There is no report yet of contagion from animal to person and vice versa," the man, known only as J, said. "Yet, I received a phone call by Julio Zarco director general of the Patient Care of the Community Madrid who told me that the dog should be killed. He asked me if I can give the authorisation, but I didn't give it. "But he told me that if I don't give my authorisation they will ask the judge for a permission to enter my property and kill the dog," he continued. "And then what? Will they kill me too?" he asked. "They don't know if I have the virus or not. "My dog is fine," he concluded. J was put in quarantine a day after his wife tested positive to Ebola. The woman worked as a nurse in Madrid's Carlos III hospital and assisted two missionaries who died from Ebola after returning from Sierra Leone in West Africa. The Ebola outbreak, the worst in history, has killed more than 3,400 people in west Africa since January. According to the World Health Organization's (WHO) latest estimates, at least 7,000 people are infected. The virus is spread via contact with infected body fluids. WHO assured people that the deadly disease is not airborne following recent speculation. RelatedEbola 'Attack Patients with Napalm to Defeat Virus' Todd Kincannon, Pro Life Politician SaysNigeria Is Ebola Meme Being Used to Spread Fears Virus 'Was Created by White People'?ALS Ice Bucket Challenge Ivory Coast Launches Ebola 'Soap Bucket Challenge'Liberia Ebola Patient Flees Hospital to Buy Food at MarketEbola Can Robots Save the World from Killer Virus?
As Ebola is becoming increasingly widespread (terrifying), governments are doing everything in their power to keep the illness contained. In Spain, that means Madrid's government has decided to euthanize the dog of a nursing assistant. The woman, who was infected with Ebola after taking care of a priest who died of the virus, was the first person outside of West Africa to contract the disease. Officials are worried that her dog, a mixed breed named Excalibur, could pass the virus on to others. According to NBC, he's been scheduled for euthanasia, despite both objections from the nursing assistant's family, as well as a change.org petition that is insisting that the dog be allowed to live, at least until more information is obtained about whether dogs can transmit the illness. While there's no concrete evidence that dogs can spread the disease, NBC points out that the virus can and does infect mammals (which makes sense, as humans are also mammals) and can be spread through them. And though there's no real research that shows that dogs are a danger, it's thought that the virus started in West Africa due to handling of wild animals. It's understandable that the government is worried (who isn't worried at this point?), but it's surprising that the dog is to be euthanized as opposed to quarantined. And if the research regarding canines' ability to fight and control the infection (while still keeping it in their system) is legitimate, it's possible that this dog could be useful in helping find a treatment for the virus. Or is that just my wishful thinking talking?
Share Madrid (AFP) Health authorities on Tuesday ordered the death of the dog owned by a Spanish health worker infected with Ebola in Madrid, triggering a campaign to save him by her husband and animal rights activists. The husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine, contacted local media to object to the decision by Madrid's department of health. "They told me that if I didn't give authorisation, they would get a judicial order to enter my home by force and sacrifice the dog," he told El Mundo newspaper. The authorities said in a statement there was a risk the dog could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Romero said the dog, Excalibur, was isolated at home with a stockpile of food and water and could relieve himself outside. The story triggered a petition and some heated responses on Twitter, under the hashtag SalvemosAExcalibur ( SaveExcalibur). Animal rights group Pacma said there was no evidence of the Ebola virus being transmitted from dogs to humans. "He should be examined and placed in quarantine, and treated if necessary," said Javier Moreno, a co founder of Pacma.
People walk by an advertising calling for financial help to fight Ebola in Africa in Madrid, Spain, Tuesday, Oct. 7, 2014. Three more people were placed under quarantine for Ebola at a Madrid hospital where a Spanish nurse became infected, authorities said Thursday. More than 50 other possible contacts were being monitored. The nurse, who had cared for a Spanish priest who died of Ebola, was the first case of Ebola being transmitted outside of West Africa, where a months long outbreak has killed at least 3,500 people and infected at least twice as many. Madrid's regional government said it would kill the pet dog of a Spanish nursing assistant who became infected with Ebola, despite the family's objections on Tuesday with a court order. There has been some evidence that dogs can get Ebola in Africa while hunting for food, and that people can be infected by animals. The mixed breed dog, will be euthanized in a way to avoid suffering and its body incinerated, the government said. A Change.org petition is asking the government to let the dog live. The nursing assistant was the first person infected outside of West Africa, after caring for a Spanish priest who died of Ebola last month. Get More at NBCNews.com
MADRID (AP) Madrid's regional government says it's going to kill the pet dog of a Spanish woman who became infected with Ebola. Authorities said in a statement Tuesday that available scientific knowledge indicates there's a risk the dog could transmit the deadly virus to humans. The Spanish nursing assistant became the first case of Ebola being transmitted outside of West Africa after she cared for a Spanish priest in Madrid who died of Ebola last month. She and her husband are now in quarantine. The government said the dog, named Excalibur, would be euthanized in a way to avoid suffering and using bio security measures that it did not specify. Its body will later be incinerated. The government had to get a court order for the euthanization over the family's objections.
The order comes just a day after Ramos became the first person known to have attracted the virus outside West Africa. Ramos' husband, Javier Limon Romero, who is also in isolation, posted photos of their dog, Excalibur, to the Facebook page of Villa Pepa Protective Association, an animal rights organization. He also asked health officials to consider placing Excalibur in quarantine. It is still unclear whether the Ebola virus can pass from dogs to humans. Tom Frieden, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said Tuesday that there is one study which suggests dogs get get Ebola. "Whether that was an accurate test and whether that was relevant we do not know," Frieden said.
Spanish authorities said they would euthanize a dog named Excalibur who is owned by Javier Lim n and his wife, a nurse's aide who got infected with Ebola. Animal lovers rallied in a bid to save the dog. Javier Lim n MADRID Among the lives on the line in the spread of Ebola outside West Africa is that of Excalibur, a stricken Spanish medical worker's 12 year old dog. Madrid's regional government on Tuesday said it would euthanize the light brown rescue dog to avoid possible contagion. Javier Lim n, husband of the infected nurse's aide, couldn't bear it. He issued a desperate public appeal to save the family pet. His plea hit a nerve. Animal lovers responded with a flurry of afternoon tweets and an online petition, urging the regional government to quarantine and test the animal for Ebola before resorting to euthanasia. By dinner time, the petition had drawn more than 86,000 signatures, and the Twitter hashtag SalvemosaExcalibur had become one of the world's top trending ones. About 20 people belonging to animal rights groups sped to Mr. Lim n's home to block his doorway from any government intrusion. "The dog is fine. He has the whole house to himself, with the open terrace so he can do his business," Mr. Lim n said in an interview with Spanish daily El Mundo. Before checking himself into a hospital quarantine unit for observation this week, he said he left Excalibur alone with plenty of water and 33 pounds of food enough to last several weeks. The dog, he insisted, was as isolated as he and his wife were and presented little risk to public health. "Are they going to put me to sleep, too?" he said. Human Ebola infections to date haven't been linked to dogs, according to International SOS, a medical and travel security services company. Javier Lim n with Excalibur. Javier Lim n The government insisted it would euthanize the dog, but as of Tuesday evening, Excalibur was fine and the protesters maintained their vigil outside the home. The outpouring of solidarity for Excalibur is part of Spaniards' growing concern for the plight of animals, said Silvia Barquero, a spokeswoman for Partido Pacma, a political party focused on animal rights. Catalonia, a wealthy region of northeastern Spain, banned bullfighting three years ago. "My country is advancing hugely in our concern for animals, and this makes me so proud," she said while standing with a throng of fellow protesters outside Mr. Lim n's home. "This never would have happened 10 years ago." It was another feature of Spaniard's anguished reactions to their first case of Ebola contagion on their country's soil. Health workers said that in the middle of the night several people who likely had no contact with an Ebola patient flooded Madrid's emergency hot line, worried that they may have caught the virus. An article on the website of El Pa s, a leading newspaper, asked "Can I get Ebola on the bus?" The hashtag VamosAMorirTodos Spanish for "We Are All Going to Die" was trending among Twitter users in Spain, according to Trendsmap, a company that tracks popular hashtags on the social media site. Spanish health officials said they had the situation under control and urged people to exercise caution in their conclusions about the safety risks. Doctors across Spain, however, said they were shocked. "I couldn't believe it," said Vicente Baos, a 50 year old family physician in Madrid. The transmission of Ebola to a health worker "inflicts huge damage on the image the world has of Spain, as the gateway to Europe," he said. It also will deepen Spaniards' wariness of people who may have been anywhere near the deadly Ebola outbreak in Africa, Dr. Baos said. In August, the doctor spent two weeks volunteering in Senegal with a group of about 30 other Spanish doctors. When he returned, friends and family "looked at you wrong," Dr. Baos said, distrustful of anyone who had traveled to West Africa recently. Raquel Rodr guez, an emergency care physician, said she knows her response to the Ebola case should be measured. After all, she said, Madrid's medical professionals are more than capable of preventing contagion. But she can't help herself. On Tuesday, the 42 year old doctor began hanging a face mask from her neck during every minute of her workday. Until the disease is contained, she said, "whenever I attend anyone with a fever, I'll just put the mask on right then." David Rom n and Christopher Bjork contributed to this article. Write to Ilan Brat at ilan.brat wsj.com and Jeannette Neumann at jeannette.neumann wsj.com
Spanish police were making further inquiries at the apartment block which is home to the nurse diagnosed with Ebola. Teresa Romero's husband Javier's among those now being monitored for the disease. But he's issued a plea for the couple's dog to be spared after authorities said it should be put down, sparking a protest outside the building. (SOUNDBITE)(Spanish) JAVIER LIMON, HUSBAND OF NURSE INFECTED WITH EBOLA, SAYING "Hi, my name is Javier Limon, Teresa Romero's husband. I am in hospital and I call on society to help me save my dog, Excalibur. They want to kill him for no reason, without following any procedure. Associations are supporting us." In Madrid about 100 people gathered outside the Spanish Health Care Ministry to protest over the government's handling of the case. They're demanding the resignation of the Health Minister. Officials say they still can't confirm how Romero contracted the disease. She'd been helping two priests who caught Ebola in Africa subsequently died after repatriation to Spain.
(Newser) Authorities aren't taking any chances in Spain, where the first case of Ebola transmission outside Africa has caused widespread alarm The dog of a Madrid nurse will be killed because authorities believe it could carry and transmit the virus, reports NBC. Madrid's regional government obtained a court order to have the dog put down despite the objections of nurse Teresa Romera and her husband, who are both in quarantine. Her husband pleaded for authorities to spare the dog by placing it in quarantine instead, and a petition supporting the quarantine option has gained nearly 250,000 signatures, reports People. Research has shown that dogs can carry Ebola without showing symptoms, although it's not clear whether any humans have been infected through contact with dogs. "There is one article in the medical literature that discusses the presence of antibodies to Ebola in dogs. Whether that was an accurate test and whether that was relevant we do not know," CDC chief Tom Friedman told reporters yesterday. "We have not identified this as a means of transmission." Romero, who is in stable condition in hospital, was among around 30 people who treated an infected Spanish missionary who later died of the disease and authorities are monitoring more than 50 people who came into contact with her, reports the BBC.
The animal might be carrying the deadly virus, health officials argue the safest way to proceed is to put it to sleep Earlier this week, it was announced that a 44 year old nurse in Span had been diagnosed with Ebola. The woman contracted the virus from a missionary that she helped treat, and is the first person in the world to get Ebola outside of Africa. Recent news on the topic says that, having put this woman and her husband in isolation at Madrid's Carlos III Hospital, health officials in Spain are now looking to put her dog to sleep. They argue that the pooch, named Excalibur, might be carrying the deadly virus in its body and could, therefore, sicken many other people. Hence, the safest way to proceed is to euthanize it.What do the dog's owners have to say about this?Neither the nurse, identified as Teresa Romero Ramos, nor her husband, Javier Lim n Romero, is ready and willing to part with their dog. They say that, rather than kill it, health officials should put it in quarantine. Since the couple is now in isolation at Madrid's Carlos III Hospital, the dog is home alone. The 44 year old nurse's husband says that he left the pooch food and water, and that the dog is free to explore the terrace, The Guardian informs. What Teresa Romero Ramos and Javier Lim n Romero can't understand is why health officials in Spain are so determined to take the easy way out and kill the dog rather than first monitor it to make sure that it really is infected. "If it bothers them so much then they should find other alternative solutions, such as putting the dog in quarantine and observation, as they have done with me. But of course a dog is easier, it doesn't matter as much," the husband said.How determined are health officials to kill this dog?Apparently, the folks looking to euthanize Excalibur are pretty much dead set on having their way. Thus, it is understood that, after the couple refused to grant them permission to put the pooch to sleep, they promised to get a court order. "I want to publicly denounce a man called Zarco, who I think is Head of Health for the community of Madrid and who's told me that I have to sacrifice my dog," Javier Lim n Romero told the press in an interview. "He's asked for my consent and I've denied it, to which he responded that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and sacrifice it," the 44 year old nurse's husband added, as cited by Daily Mail.Not giving up without a fightShortly after health officials threated to kill their dog, the couple contacted several animal protection organizations and asked members and supporters to help them save Excalibur. In just a few hours, the hashtag SalvemosAExcalibur (i.e. Let'sSaveExcalibur) was trending on Twitter, and the online community got flooded with photos of other people's pets posing with messages demanding that the dog be put in quarantine and not killed. Somebody even went as far as to start an online petition asking Spanish health officials to reconsider and only put Excalibur to sleep after checking to see whether or not the dog is indeed carrying the deadly virus in its body. "Not only is it unfair to be infected with Ebola by the sanitary assistant due to the lack of necessary means, they must also lose their dog as a result of an thoughtless decision, as it would be much easier to isolate or quarantine the dog just as they have the victim's husband." "If this woman were to die, the dog which has accompanied them for so many years would be an important emotional support for her husband. This is not 'just' a dog, for this couple he is one of the family," the petition reads. As of now, nearly 250,000 dog lovers have signed this petition. It is still unclear whether Spanish officials will take this plea into consideration and not euthanize the dog. Hopefully, more information will soon be shared with the public.
The husband of the Spanish Ebola victim has launched a campaign to save the couple's dog after health authorities told him it will have to be put down. The husband of the Spanish nurse who has been infected with the virus launched the online campaign with several animal protection organisations. In the note written online, Javier Limon Romero said health officials had asked him for permission to put down the dog, named Excalibur, The Guardian reports. More than 135,000 people have signed the online petition to save the dog and thousands more are raising awareness of the situation with the hashtag SalvemosAExcalibur (Let's save Excalibur) on Twitter. "I said no. And they told me that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and put him down," Romero wrote. Limon Romero is currently in an isolation ward in Spain where his wife, Teresa Romero Ramos, is also in quarantine. He said the dog is at home alone but he has left out 'several buckets of water' and 'filled the bathtub with water and left out 15kg of feed'. "The terrace was also left open so that he could do his business," he said. The husband of the Ebola victim has argued that Excalibur is not infected with Ebola and said he would not be a danger to anyone. "If it bothers them so much then they should find other alternative solutions, such as putting the dog in quarantine and observation, as they have done with me," he said. "But of course a dog is easier, it doesn't matter as much," he added.
Barely two days after the first case of Ebola in Spain was reported, Madrid's health officials said that they plan to euthanize the patient's pet dog as a safety precaution. The patient's pet, a mixed breed dog named Excalibur, was declared by the regional government of Madrid as a possible threat to public health, according to Yahoo! News. The patient and her husband, who is also now admitted to the hospital despite not showing any symptoms yet, have expressed objections to the government's plan. The story was first published through Facebook and has generated online support for the dog's owners from pet lovers and dog wellness advocates. The female patient, 40 years of age, started exhibiting symptoms on September 30 but was admitted to the hospital five days after due to fever. Investigations showed that the woman worked at La Paz Carlos III Hospital in Madrid with a team of medical professionals working on Spanish missionaries who died due to the virus. The patient's husband said he was approached by a local health official about the situation. "He said he was going to ask for a court order to forcibly enter my home and sacrifice Excalibur," said the husband. "I was asked to give them my consent, but I obviously refused." The entry of the virus case in European soil has baffled local health professionals, who have traced the problem to lack of training and preparation.
Wednesday, 8 October 2014 (3 hours ago) Authorities aren't taking any chances in Spain, where the first case of Ebola transmission outside Africa has caused widespread alarm The dog of a Madrid nurse will be killed because authorities believe it could carry and transmit the virus, reports NBC . Madrid's regional government obtained a court order to have...
Teresa Romero Ramos has been placed in quarantine along with her husband and dogFacebook The first person to contract the deadly Ebola virus outside of Africa has been named as Spanish nurse Teresa Romero Ramos. The 44 year old currently in quarantine along with her husband Javier Limon Romero and their pet dog, Excalibur. On Monday it was announced that the nurse, who had been treating a Sierra Leone repatriate at Madrid's Carlos III hospitalis, had twice tested positively for Ebola. Spanish health authorities are now monitoring 22 people she may have come into contact with after it was reported a fifth person had contracted the virus in the Spanish capital. Javier Lim n Romero left 15kg of feed out for his dog when he left his home to be quarantinedFacebook Husband Javier Lim n Romero has since pleaded with authorities to not put down their dog after he claimed they had sought his permission to euthanise the pet. "I said no. And they told me that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and put him down," Romero said in a note to animal protection groups. He left "several buckets of water, filled the bathtub with water and left out 15kg of feed. "The terrace was also left open so that he could do his business," he said. David Cameron will today (8 October) chair a COBRA meeting to discuss the ongoing Ebola epidemic. RelatedLondon Mining Shares Plunge 80 as Ebola Outbreak Makes Stock Near WorthlessEbola New Drug Target Developed That Can Be Used Against the VirusWHO Ebola Cases in Europe 'Unavoidable'Ebola Outbreak Authorities to Kill Spanish Nurse's Dog Fearing ContagionEbola Can Robots Save the World from Killer Virus?Ebola Zombies Victims 'Rising from the Dead' Fake News Story Goes Viral, Sparks Outrage on Social MediaEbola Japanese Tourist Kawakubo Yuko Suspected of Contracting Deadly Virus in India
The Madrid regional government confirmed on Tuesday that it would euthanize the dog belonging to the nursing assistant who was diagnosed with ebola earlier this week. The husband of Teresa Romero, Javier L. R., began a campaign on the social networks on Tuesday in an attempt to save the life of his pet, named Excalibur. "We cannot take the risk," explained Felipe Vilas, head of the Madrid Official College of Veterinarians. His criteria were the determining factor for the decision of the Madrid regional authorities to put the animal down. According to Vilas, there are few studies about ebola and dogs, but those that do exist show that in areas where there has been an outbreak, a significant number of animals present high levels of antibodies. That means that they have had contact with the virus. While this does not prove that the transmission from animal to man, it cannot be ruled out that a dog who has been in contact with the virus could not excrete it at some stage, with or without presenting symptoms. But the leading global expert on ebola, Eric Leroy, told EL PA S that "the dog did not need to be put down because it is important from a scientific viewpoint." The role of dogs in the transmission of ebola has not been widely researched, but a 2005 statement from the Institute of Research for Development in Paris stated that "these domestic animals can become infected and excrete the virus during a determined period, thus becoming a potential source of infection for humans." In a message sent out via the social networks by Javier L. R. on Tuesday, he revealed staff from the regional government got in touch with him to seek his consent to have the animal put down. As he explained, the dog was left alone in hospital after its owners were admitted to the Carlos III hospital. His wife has been confirmed to have ebola, after she attended to two Spanish missionaries with the virus, while he is under observation in isolation. He also made clear in his statements that he had left the dog with enough food and water to last him a number of days. "This measure is more than justified, no matter how tough it may appear," Vilas explained. "The protection of the population is the most important factor here. No matter how small the risk, the logical step is to destroy the animal." The Madrid regional government has confirmed that it has requested authorization from the dog's owners to euthanize it. Should it not get permission, Vilas is unequivocal about what will happen next a court order will be sought from a judge, a process that could take several days. "The dog is in their house, and the house is closed," Vilas explained. "He has water and food, so there will be no problem if he is there two or three days." Javier and his wife had sent out a number of messages via animal protection associations in a bid to save the dog. The messages were accompanied by a number of images of both the animal, and the couple themselves.
Spanish nurse with Ebola is first to contract virus outside Africa The pet dog of the Spanish nurse who came down with Ebola is facing death officials are trying to kill it because it might spread the disease. Government officials in Madrid have obtained a court order to euthanize and incinerate Excalibur, the beloved pet of Ebola victim Teresa Romero Ramos and her husband, Javier Limon Romero, the Daily Mail reported. Ramos is the 44 year old Galicia resident who on Monday became the first person to contract Ebola outside of West Africa. As a precaution, her husband was quarantined Tuesday in a separate room at the same hospital where she is being monitored. And because the couple's dog could also spread the disease to humans, health officials have called for it to be put down as a precaution. The move outraged Javier Romero, who called Tuesday for Excalibur to also be quarantined. "I want to publicly denounce a man called Zarco, who I think is head of health for the community of Madrid and who's told me that I have to sacrifice my dog," he raged on social media. "He's asked for my consent and I've denied it, to which he responded that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and sacrifice it." Instead of allowing officials to come in and take Excalibur away from him, Romero handed over his four legged best friend to the Madrid based animal welfare group Mascoteros Solidarios. The group confirmed in a press release that the enraged dog owner indeed "ceded the custody" of his pet to Carlos Rodriguez, a lawyer working for Solidarios told the newspaper. "Several animal welfare groups and private individuals have mobilized following Javier's message over social networking sites about the plans to sacrifice the animal," the release said. Spanish authorities also were tracking down all the woman's contacts, and put more than 50 other people under observation, including her relatives and fellow health care workers. "The priority now is to establish that there is no risk to anybody else," emergency coordinator Fernando Simon said. Even so, the potential repercussions of Ebola's presence in Europe became clear, as shares of Spanish airline and hotel chain companies slumped in Tuesday's trading. Spain is Europe's biggest vacation destination after France, and investors were apparently spooked that the deadly virus could scare away travelers. "All we want is for the authorities to consider the option of treating this animal like a human being and putting it into quarantine." But in a public statement of their own, Madrid health officials said taking the life of Excalibur would be completely justified especially given the frightening situation surrounding a possible Ebola outbreak. "The only way of eliminating the existing risk of the transmission of the illness is by putting the animal, which has been in contact with the virus, to sleep," they said. Animals, indeed, have been known to be the primary cause of Ebola outbreaks in Africa, according to Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the US Cnters for Disease Control and Prevention. "In rural areas, it can infect mammals," he said during a Tuesday press conference. "Probably bats and forest animals."
Pet lovers have launched a campaign to save the dog of Teresa Romero Ramos, a Spanish nurse who became the first person outside of Western Africa to be infected with Ebola. Mrs Romero Ramos has been quarantined after it was discovered she contracted the virus, however officials in Spain are planning to euthanasia her dog Excalibur as she has had contact with him since she was infected. Her husband, Javier Limon Romero, who has also been quarantined, posted a message on the Facebook page of a Spanish animal protection organisation. The post, translated into English via EL PA S, reads Hello, my name is Javier Limon Romero. I am the husband of Teresa Romero Ramos, the nursing assistant infected with Ebola for voluntarily treating the two infected patients who were repatriated to Spain. I want to publicly condemn that a certain Zarco, who I think is the health chief for the Madrid region, has told me that they have to put down my dog, just like that, without further ado. He has asked for my consent, which I have categorically denied. He says that they will therefore request a judicial order to break into my house and destroy him.Before going to the hospital I left him several buckets of water, the bath tub also full of water, and a 15kg bag of feed, so he had food and water. I also left the terrace open so he could do his business. It seems unfair to me that because of their mistake, they want to solve this the quick way. A dog will not pass anything on to another person, and the same goes the other way around. If this problem worries them so much, I think other alternative solutions can be found, such as, for example, putting the dog in quarantine and observation, as they have done with me. Or maybe they will have to put me down, just in case. But, of course, a dog is easier, it doesn't matter as much. His plea has garnered much support on social media, with pet lovers are posting pictures of their own dogs with the hashtag SalvemosAExcalibur, which translates to 'Save Excalibur'. Trending! SalvemosAExcalibur "Let's save Excalibur" Tweeps rally to save Ebola patient's pet http t.co jigjqGKyhX pic.twitter.com qHtps6G1bf Femi Oke ( FemiOke) October 8, 2014 Canuto dice SalvemosAExcalibur pic.twitter.com ZSKBSYzYM7 Jos Enrique Machuca ( yodigono) October 7, 2014 Clifford i jo amb excalibur SalvemosAExcalibur pic.twitter.com erO5nKDYv3 Immeta Peremarch ( IPeremarch) October 7, 2014 A change.org petition has even been set up as part of the campaign. The petition, which at the time of writing has received 277,524 digital signatures, argues that Excalibur should not have to suffer because the Spanish government wasn't able to adequately protect Mrs Romero from the virus, and that it is easier to quarantine the dog than euthanise it. It adds 'If this woman were to die, the dog which has accompanied them for so many years would be an important emotional support for her husband.' MORE 'He's alive!' 'Dead' Ebola victim left in the street for days found to be alive MORE Spanish nurse becomes first person to contract ebola in Europe MORE British hospitals brace for deadly Ebola virus to arrive here 'in days'
A dog belonging to the Spanish nurse suffering from the Ebola virus may soon be euthanized, an animal lovers have launched an last ditch campaign on social media to save the pet under the salvemosaexcalibur hashtag. The mixed breed dog, named Excalibur, belongs to Javier Limon Romero and Teresa Romero Ramos, both in quarantine after Ramos was diagnosed with Ebola. While the dog reportedly has no signs of the disease, local government officials want to have it killed as a precaution for fear it may be able to spread the virus. "The only way of eliminating the existing risk of the transmission of the illness is by putting the animal, which has been in contact with the virus, to sleep," officials said in a statement cited by the New York Post. From his quarantine room, Romero said he wants the dog quarantined and not put down. "I want to publicly denounce a man called Zarco, who I think is Head of Health for the community of Madrid and who's told me that I have to sacrifice my dog," Romero said via social media, according to The Daily Mail. "He's asked for my consent and I've denied it, to which he responded that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and sacrifice it." Images of the dog were shared on Facebook by La Protectora de Animales Villa Pepa, a local humane organization Animal lovers have taken up the call, causing salvemosaexcalibur to trend worldwide. Many have used the hashtag to show pictures of their own pets supporting the cause Along with the tweets, there's also a petition on Change.org calling for the dog to be spared.
The husband of the Spanish nurse who became the first to contract the Ebola virus in Europe has started an online campaign to save the couple's dog. Authorities in Madrid have ordered the dog, called Excalibur, to be put down, saying "available scientific information" cannot rule out it could spread the virus. Animal welfare groups however have shared a note from Javier Limon Romero who said he was contacted health officials who asked for his consent to put down the dog. In the note, translated by El Pais, Mr Romero says he refused to give consent but was told a court order would be requested. He said "It seems unfair to me that because of their mistake, they want to solve this the quick way." In the note Mr Romero explained how before going to the hospital he left the dog with enough food and water. A photograph provided by Animalist Party Against Animal Abuse (PACMA) of Teresa Romero Ramos, the Spanish nurse who became the first person to contract Ebola in Europe He added "A dog will not pass anything on to another person, and the same goes the other way around. "If this problem worries them so much, I think other alternative solutions can be found, such as, for example, putting the dog in quarantine and observation, as they have done with me." The plea has now sparked an online campaign with pet owners across the world posting pictures of their animals along with the hashtags SalvemosaExcalibur and SaveExcalibur. Mr Romero has been placed in quarantine after his wife, nurse Teresa Romero Ramos, became the first to contract Ebola in Europe. Mrs Romero Ramos, who helped treat two Spanish missionaries who died after returning from Africa with Ebola, tested positive for the disease on Monday. Four people have been admitted to hospital for observation. One of the four, another nurse, who had diarrhea but no fever, tested negative for the virus, a Spanish health source said. At least one major study has suggested that dogs can be infected with the virus without having symptoms. It is less clear how likely their are to spread it to people however. Carlos Rodriguez, a Spanish veterinarian and host of a talk show about animals, said the husband had messaged him from the hospital, trying to grant him temporary custody of the mixed breed dog. But he said that now there is a court order, he "can't stop this happening." The Spanish animal rights group Animal Equality has complained that authorities wanted to "sacrifice the animal without even diagnosing it or considering the possibility of placing it in quarantine."
MADRID Health authorities on Tuesday ordered the death of the dog owned by a Spanish health worker infected with Ebola in Madrid, triggering a campaign to save him by her husband and animal rights activists. Excalibur the dog. Credit Associated Press The husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine, contacted local media to object to the decision by Madrid's department of health. "They told me that if I didn't give authorisation, they would get a judicial order to enter my home by force and sacrifice the dog," he told El Mundo newspaper. The authorities said in a statement there was a risk the dog could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Romero said the dog, Excalibur, was isolated at home with a stockpile of food and water and could relieve himself outside. The story triggered a petition and some heated responses on Twitter, under the hashtag SalvemosAExcalibur ( SaveExcalibur). Animal rights group Pacma said there was no evidence of the Ebola virus being transmitted from dogs to humans. "He should be examined and placed in quarantine, and treated if necessary," said Javier Moreno, a co founder of Pacma. MORE ON PAWNATION Dog, Lazarus, Rises From Dead After Botched Killing
MOSCOW, October 8 (RIA Novosti) The dog of the Spanish nurse infected with Ebola was almost euthanized on Tuesday, according to government officials in Madrid however, pet lovers around the world mobilized and have started a campaign on social media to save the dog, the New Zealand Herald reports. Pet lovers flooded social media with pictures of their animals as part of the international campaign. Twitter is filled with pictures of dogs, cats and even birds, which have been posted with the " SalvemosAExcalibur" tag, which translate from Spanish to "Let's save Excalibur". The campaign started after Madrid's regional authorities decided to euthanize the beloved pet of Teresa Romero Ramos, the nurse infected with the deadly Ebola virus. Apparently, animals can be infected with Ebola, and then, in turn, pass the virus to humans, the New York Post said. "There is one article in the medical literature that discusses the presence of antibodies to Ebola in dogs. Whether that was an accurate test and whether that was relevant we do not know", said Tom Frieden, director of the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as quoted by NBC News. The Ebola outbreak has already killed more than 3,400 people in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, according to World Health Organization (WHO).
0ctorber 8 Health authorities on Tuesday ordered the death of the dog owned by a Spanish health worker infected with Ebola in Madrid, triggering a campaign to save him by her husband and animal rights activists. The husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine, contacted local media to object to the decision by Madrid's department of health. "They told me that if I didn't give authorisation, they would get a judicial order to enter my home by force and sacrifice the dog," he told El Mundo newspaper. The authorities said in a statement there was a risk the dog could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Romero said the dog, Excalibur, was isolated at home with a stockpile of food and water and could relieve himself outside. The story triggered a petition and some heated responses on Twitter, under the hashtag SalvemosAExcalibur ( SaveExcalibur). Animal rights group Pacma said there was no evidence of the Ebola virus being transmitted from dogs to humans. "He should be examined and placed in quarantine, and treated if necessary," said Javier Moreno, a co founder of Pacma.
Spain has issued a court order to kill the dog, fearing he might have contracted Ebola too(Facebook) Spanish authorities have captured the dog of Teresa Romero Ramos, a nurse who tested positive to Ebola in Madrid, according to reports. Spanish news agency Europa Press ran a photo apparently showing the authorities taking the dog away. The capture follows a court order which allowed authorities to enter Romero Ramos's premises to take the dog, named Excalibur, and put it down amid suspicions he might have contracted the deadly virus too. Romero Ramos's husband, Javier Lim n Romero, said he received a phone call by the Patient Care of the Community Madrid who asked permission to kill the dog. Lim n Romero denied the permission and dismissed the authorities' worries that Excalibur may be carrying the Ebola virus. "If it bothers them so much then they should find other alternative solutions, such as putting the dog in quarantine and observation, as they have done with me," he said. "But of course a dog is easier, it doesn't matter as much." The man's plea to save his dog prompted the netizens to create the Twitter hashtag SalvemosAExcalibur, or Let's Save Excalibur, to urge the authorities to spare the dog's life. My heart is bkoken. don't understand why Spain kill a dog inted put him in quarantine. Why kill an innocent? SalvemosaExcalibur SHAME! Andr a ( AndreaAnnnddy) October 8, 2014 Community Managers, we can fight for the Pet's Rights with our work. Shared about salvemosaexcalibur Please, Justice to investigate it! Maria Nr. ( MariaNr Galicia) October 8, 2014 Nearly 280,000 people have also signed an online petition. Researchers said dogs can transmit the deadly virus to humans, however the risk is unknown and previous research has shown dogs do not get sick from Ebola and that the virus can be cleared from the animal. Lim n Romero was put in quarantine a day after his wife tested positive to Ebola. Romero Ramos, who is also in quarantine, worked as a nurse in Madrid's Carlos III hospital and assisted two missionaries who died from Ebola after returning from Sierra Leone in West Africa. Reports emerged on Tuesday (7 October) that two other people suspected of being infected were admitted to hospital in Spain. The Ebola outbreak, the worst in history, has killed more than 3,400 people in west Africa since January. According to the World Health Organization's (WHO) latest estimates, at least 7,000 people are infected. The virus is spread via contact with infected body fluids. WHO assured people that the deadly disease is not airborne following recent speculation. RelatedEbola 'Attack Patients with Napalm to Defeat Virus' Todd Kincannon, Pro Life Politician SaysNigeria Is Ebola Meme Being Used to Spread Fears Virus 'Was Created by White People'?ALS Ice Bucket Challenge Ivory Coast Launches Ebola 'Soap Bucket Challenge'Ebola Outbreak Sierra Leone Grave Diggers Strike over Demand for 'Danger Money'WHO Ebola Cases in Europe 'Unavoidable'
Madrid's regional government said it would kill the pet dog of a Spanish nursing assistant who became infected with Ebola overcoming the family's objections on Tuesday with a court order. The nursing assistant was the first person infected outside of West Africa, after caring for a Spanish priest who died of Ebola last month. Authorities have three people under quarantine and said that available scientific knowledge indicates there's a risk the dog could transmit the deadly virus to humans. Read the rest of the story at NBC News
The husband of a Spanish nurse diagnosed with Ebola has appealed for the couple's dog to be spared as authorities say it should be put down. Teresa Romero's husband Javier is among those now being monitored for the disease. But he's issued a plea for the couple's dog to be spared after authorities said it should be put down, sparking a protest outside the building. In Madrid about 100 people gathered outside the Spanish Health Care Ministry to protest over the government's handling of the case. They're demanding the resignation of the Health Minister. Officials say they still can't confirm how Romero contracted the disease. She'd been helping two priests who caught Ebola in Africa subsequently died after repatriation to Spain.
A day after Madrid health officials obtained a court order to kill the dog owned by the Spanish nurse diagnosed with Ebola, the chorus to save him is growing louder. Dozens of people lined up Wednesday outside Teresa Romero Ramos' home where Excalibur, the mixed breed dog, was left home alone by her husband, Javier Limon Romero, who is being monitored at a hospital for Ebola symptoms. A Change.org petition to save the dog has gathered more than 300,000 signatures as the hashtag SalvemosaExcalibur Spanish for "Let's Save Excalibur" continues trending on Twitter. On Tuesday, Romero penned an open letter, posted to Facebook by Villa Pepa Protective Association, an animal rights group, denouncing the Madrid health department's decision to sacrifice his dog. "I was asked to give them my consent, but I obviously refused," Romero wrote. "He said he was going to ask for a court order to forcibly enter my home and sacrifice Excalibur." Romero says he left the dog several buckets of water and food before coming to the hospital, where he has been quarantined along with two others who are being observed for symptoms. Twenty two other people who came into contact with the nurse are being closely monitored, Spanish health officials said Tuesday. The nurse had helped treat two missionaries who contracted Ebola in West Africa and were repatriated to Spain last month. Both died shortly after arriving in Madrid. The nurse began feeling ill on Sept. 30 and was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday. Madrid's regional government obtained a court order to euthanize their pet, saying "available scientific knowledge suggests a risk that the mixed breed dog could transmit the virus to humans." "It seems unfair," Javier wrote. "If you are really worried about this problem I think you can find another type of alternative solution, such as putting the dog in quarantine and observation as it has me. Or maybe you will have to sacrifice me just in case. But of course, with a dog it's easier, it doesn't matter as much." According to the World Health Organization, more than 3,400 people have been killed and more than 7,400 infected since the Ebola outbreak began in March. Animal officials say it's unclear what risk the dog poses. While no case of Ebola spreading to people from dogs has ever been documented, it's not out of the realm of possibility, Dr. Thomas Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, told the Associated Press. While some dogs in West Africa have tested positive for the Ebola virus, they showed no signs of being infected, Michael San Filippo, senior media relations specialist for the American Veterinary Medical Association, told the Pittsburgh Post Gazette last month. "There is more concern about fruit bats and nonhuman primates," San Filippo said.
Teresa Romero Ramos is the first person outside Africa to contract the virus The Spanish nurse who has contracted Ebola says she followed all safety protocols, and has now idea how she contracted the killer virus. Teresa Romero Ramos, 44, was one of the medical team who treated the two repatriated Spanish priests who died from Ebola. She was diagnosed with the killer disease on Monday. When asked how she was doing by Spanish newspaper El Mundo she replied "All the better I'm a little better, yes." Quizzed about how she may have fallen ill, Teresa replied "I really can't say, I haven't the slightest idea." Follow the latest news on the Ebola epidemic here The frail sounding nurse, speaking from her hospital bed, responded "Yes, I did", when asked if she had followed the safety protocol. Teresa's diagnosis sparked a red alert, as Spanish health chiefs launched an investigation into how the Madrid nurse became the first person outside of Sierra Leone, Liberia or Guinea to catch the virus. Her husband has launched a campaign to stop the authorities' reported plan to put down the couple's pet dog. Teresa and Javier Limon Romero are being held in quarantine in separate rooms at the same hospital in the Spanish capital. Today, husband Javier, who is being looked after at the Carlos III Hospital, forwarded a message from his hospital room claiming health chiefs in Madrid want to put down their pet dog Excalibur. Javier, who lives in the Madrid suburb of Alcorcon, raged "I want to publicly denounce a man called Zarco, who I think is Head of Health for the community of Madrid and who's told me that I have my dog put down. "He's asked for my consent and I've denied it, to which he responded that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and have it put down." Poll loading ...
Spanish protesters camped outside the house of Europe's first Ebola victim have clashed with police, as they bid to save her dog, Excalibur, who authorities are planning to put down. The policemen caused a scuffle when they dragged the protesters, who were blocking the gates, away from the entrance of the apartment building, in the Madrid suburb of Alcorcon. Excalibur the dog remains inside, but on Wednesday afternoon authorities entered the building to clean the flat and remove the dog. The 12 year old rescue dog is owned by Maria Teresa Romero Ramos, who on Monday was confirmed as being the first person in Europe to contract the deadly virus. She caught the disease through her work as a nurse, when she cared for a Spanish missionary priest who died on September 25. Since she was admitted to hospital on Monday, her husband Javier Limon and three other people have been quarantined two other members of the nursing team in Madrid, and a man who had recently travelled through West Africa. Related Articles Spain Ebola case Screen and sticky tape to protect against virus 08 Oct 2014 Footage shows Spanish nurses cleaning Ebola victim's room 08 Oct 2014 Ebola explained 08 Oct 2014 Spanish nurse 'I have no idea how I contracted Ebola' 08 Oct 2014 World Bank rings alarm over 20bn worst case Ebola scenario 08 Oct 2014 Ebola British army prepares to combat the disease 08 Oct 2014 But much of the attention has focused on the plight of Excalibur, who authorities in Madrid said should be euthanised to stop the spread of the disease. Scientists are not sure whether Ebola can be transferred from dogs to humans. Excalibur A petition, organised online on change.org, had been signed by over 300,000 people by Wednesday morning. Four hours later, it had passed 350,000 signatures. A Facebook page, set up to campaign on the animal's behalf, had over 86,000 "likes" and the Twitter hashtag "Save Excalibur" SalvarExcalibur was being widely spread. Over 75,000 tweets mentioning the mongrel were sent in the past 24 hours. On Wednesday morning there were 142 tweets per minute about the subject. Mr Limon highlighted the dog's case in an interview with Spanish newspaper El Mundo, in which he begged the vets not to destroy the animal. "The dog is fine," he said, speaking from the Madrid hospital where he is currently quarantined. "He has the whole house to himself, with the open terrace so he can do his business." Mr Limon, before checking himself into Carlos III hospital, said he left Excalibur alone with plenty of water and 33 pounds of food enough to last several weeks. He said that the dog had no contact with the outside world and so presented little risk to public health. "Are they going to put me to sleep, too?" he said. Indeed, experts are divided as to whether killing the dog would serve any purpose. Eric Leroy, who studied Ebola transmission between dogs and humans in Gabon in 2001, said that dogs could catch the disease but not show any symptoms. And he said that their study of 439 dogs lead them to believe most dogs caught the virus through eating other infected animals although it was possible, but difficult, to catch it from contact with humans. "We've shown that dogs can get infected," he said. "And although the risk of infection from humans is low, it does exist. That's why you have to take necessary precautions so that there is no transmission." Animal Rights activists stand outside Maria Teresa Romero Ramos's apartment (Getty) But Mr Leroy said that the dog should be kept alive, even if infected, so that more can be understood about the virus. "I would recommend keeping him in quarantine and under observation in a specific site but not killing him," he said. "I would look at his evolution through various parameters biological, virological, serological (studying the plasma). It's a precious opportunity to see if dogs can play a key role in the propagation of Ebola." But Madrid's health advisory board stated "There exists data which confirms the risk from dogs with positive antibodies from Ebola, which indicates that dogs can suffer from a process of viremia (introducing viruses into the bloodstream), even though they do not show any symptoms." And animal rights campaigners in Spain have seized on the case calling it yet another example of the Spanish authorities' incompetence. "We demand that the animal be diagnosed and put in quarantine and treated if necessary," said Javier Moreno, the international coordinator of Igualdad Animal. "This just shows the incompetence of those who are handling this crisis."
For anyone concerned about Spain's ability to contain Ebola, after a Spanish nurse's aide tested positive for the virus, fear not Madrid's regional government plans to euthanize the infected woman's pet dog in the interest of combatting contagion. The dog, a 12 year old mutt named Excalibur, shows no sign of infection, and it's unclear whether the disease even can be transmitted from dogs to humans. A 2005 report from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention notes that 'dogs might be asymptomatically infected by Ebola virus,' and that during Gabon's 2001 02 outbreak, 'several dogs were highly exposed to Ebola virus by eating infected dead animals.' 'We cannot take the risk,' Felipe Vilas, of Madrid's Official College of Veterinarians, tells El Pais. The infected woman's husband Javier Romero, who is also in quarantine, said he was contacted by the Madrid authorities on Tuesday asking for his consent to kill the dog. "I said no," Romero wrote from his hospital bed, in a message circulated to animal rights agencies. "And they told me that they would demand a court order to enter my house and sacrifice him." Activists have now taken up Excalibur's cause. The Wall Street Journal reports that a group are blocking the entrance to the family's home to prevent the government from taking the dog. Romero's wife, who had been caring for an infected missionary flown into Spain from Sierra Leone, has said she has 'no idea' how she contracted the virus. She was isolated on Monday, nearly one week after first complaining of fever and weakness. The Spanish health ministry on Tuesday said it was monitoring the other members of her medical team, along with 22 other people it has 'so far' identified as having come into contact with her. Cold comfort, apparently, to Spanish citizens, who are showing a distinct lack of stiff upper lip. The hashtag VamosAmorirTodos ('We Are All Going to Die') is now trending across social media. The Ebola outbreak so far has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa.
Share Madrid (AFP) The dog of a Spanish nurse infected with Ebola in Madrid was put down Wednesday by health authorities who feared it could spread the deadly disease, despite a campaign to spare him by animal rights activists. Protesters trying to save the dog, a mixed breed mutt named Excalibur, scuffled with police as they attempted to stop health department officials from removing the animal from the nurse Teresa Romero's apartment in Alcorcon on the outskirts of the Spanish capital. Two people were injured as officers carried away some of the dozens of activists who blocked a white veterinary van from entering the gated complex where the apartment is located, according to an AFP photographer at the scene. Police said they had no reports of any injuries. Just 40 minutes after the dog was removed from the apartment, Madrid's regional government issued a statement saying it had been put down. The dog had been put to sleep "to avoid suffering," the statement said. The regional government obtained a court order on Tuesday to euthanise the dog, saying there was a risk it could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Animal rights protest Animal rights groups said there was no evidence that the Ebola virus could be transmitted from dogs to humans. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) said it was "sad to hear" that the dog had been put down. "The last thing that this nurse needs is to learn that a family member has been lost, even if, as we all hope, her own life is saved," the director of the British branch of the animal rights group, Mimi Bekhechi, said. The dog's owner, Romero, in her 40s, was part of a medical team that treated two Spanish priests who were brought back from west Africa for treatment for Ebola but both died. She was diagnosed with the disease on Monday, becoming the first known case of Ebola being transmitted outside of Africa, where a months long outbreak has killed nearly 3,900 people and infected at least twice as many. Her husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine as a precaution, contacted Spanish media to object to the decision by Madrid's regional government to have the dog put down. "The dog is fine. He has the whole house to himself, with the open terrace so he can do his business," he said in a telephone interview with El Mundo newspaper from his hospital room. He said the dog had no contact with the outside world, had enough food and water inside the apartment to last for several weeks and therefore presented little risk to public health. "Are they going to put me to sleep, too?" Limon said. An online petition on the website Change.org, demanding that the dog be put in quarantine instead of being put down, had gathered 374,000 signatures on Wednesday. "This is not 'just' a dog. For this couple he is one of the family," the petition read.
Teresa and Javier Romero who are being held in quarantine had begged for their pet dog to be spared, but authorities said they had no choice but put him to sleep A dog belonging to a Spanish nurse infected with Ebola has been put down despite fierce protest from animal rights groups. Demonstrators had mounted a vigil outside the flat belonging to Teresa Romero Ramos and her husband Javier in a suburb of Madrid. The pair are in quarantine in a hospital after Ms Romero Ramos became the first person to be diagnosed with the disease outside Africa on Monday. Mr Romero had sent a message from his hospital room begging for the pair's pet dog Excalibur not to be euthanised. Authorities had told him they had "no other choice" than to put the animal to sleep because he had been exposed to the killer virus. Dogs cannot get Ebola but it is believed they may be able to transmit the disease. Tonight regional government health spokesman Javier Rodriguez confirmed Excalibur was euthanised inside the Romero home at around 6.30pm local time. The body was driven away in a white van as protesters shouted "Murderers" and several threw themselves on the ground in front of the vehicle. Around 300,000 people signed an online petition calling on authorities to spare the dog and for it to be quarantined instead. Avila based animal welfare centre Villa Pepa, which posted an SOS message from Teresa's husband on Tuesday after he learned their pet was to be put down, said in a statement "We're sorry Excalibur." "Thousands of people all over the world asked for you to be put in quarantine but they have decided to sacrifice you without listening to us. "All our support to your family." It also emerged tonight that nurse Ms Romero Ramos only realised she had been infected with Ebola after reading about the confirmation on her mobile phone from inside her quarantined hospital room. She became infected after treating a priest who was flown into Madrid for treatment from West Africa. Britain is to deploy more than 750 military personnel to West Africa to help with the establishment of Ebola treatment centres and an Ebola training academy. The latest deployment of British military personnel to the Ebola affected region followed a meeting of the Government's Cobra emergency committee chaired by the Prime Minister. A Number 10 spokesman said the meeting covered both the UK preparedness for potential domestic cases of Ebola and the UK's efforts to combat the disease in West Africa. The announcement came as the first Ebola patient diagnosed in the United States, Thomas Eric Duncan, died in a Texas hospital and the World Health Organisation (WHO) warned that sporadic cases in Europe are "unavoidable". Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt warned it was possible someone with Ebola could enter Britain but added the health service was prepared. He told reporters "Well this is clearly one of the most serious global health emergencies of recent years. Our first priority as the Government is to make sure the British people are safe. "It is now entirely possible that someone with Ebola will come to the UK by one route or another but we have very, very good plans in place. The NHS has a proven track record of dealing with and helping people with Ebola. Our ambulance services are equipped with the protective suits. But the most important thing we can do to protect the UK's population is to play our part in making sure that the disease is contained in West Africa." The Government has come under pressure to introduce screening at airports and other transport hubs to prevent the disease spreading in the UK.
Madrid (AFP) The dog of a Spanish nurse infected with Ebola in Madrid was put down Wednesday by health authorities who feared it could spread the deadly disease, despite a campaign to spare him by animal rights activists. Protesters trying to save the dog, a mixed breed mutt named Excalibur, scuffled with police as they attempted to stop health department officials from removing the animal from the nurse Teresa Romero's apartment in Alcorcon on the outskirts of the Spanish capital. Two people were injured as officers carried away some of the dozens of activists who blocked a white veterinary van from entering the gated complex where the apartment is located, according to an AFP photographer at the scene. Police said they had no reports of any injuries. Just 40 minutes after the dog was removed from the apartment, Madrid's regional government issued a statement saying it had been put down. The dog had been put to sleep "to avoid suffering," the statement said. The regional government obtained a court order on Tuesday to euthanise the dog, saying there was a risk it could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Animal rights groups said there was no evidence that the Ebola virus could be transmitted from dogs to humans. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) said it was "sad to hear" that the dog had been put down. "The last thing that this nurse needs is to learn that a family member has been lost, even if, as we all hope, her own life is saved," the director of the British branch of the animal rights group, Mimi Bekhechi, said. The dog's owner, Romero, in her 40s, was part of a medical team that treated two Spanish priests who were brought back from west Africa for treatment for Ebola but both died. She was diagnosed with the disease on Monday, becoming the first known case of Ebola being transmitted outside of Africa, where a months long outbreak has killed nearly 3,900 people and infected at least twice as many. Her husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine as a precaution, contacted Spanish media to object to the decision by Madrid's regional government to have the dog put down. "The dog is fine. He has the whole house to himself, with the open terrace so he can do his business," he said in a telephone interview with El Mundo newspaper from his hospital room. He said the dog had no contact with the outside world, had enough food and water inside the apartment to last for several weeks and therefore presented little risk to public health. "Are they going to put me to sleep, too?" Limon said. An online petition on the website Change.org, demanding that the dog be put in quarantine instead of being put down, had gathered 374,000 signatures on Wednesday. "This is not 'just' a dog. For this couple he is one of the family," the petition read.
Locals and members of animal rights groups protest as police remove Excalibur, the dog of an ebola infected Spanish nurse and her husband, form the couples residence on October 7, 2014 in Alcorcon, Spain (AFP) The dog of a Spanish nurse infected with Ebola in Madrid was put down Wednesday by health authorities who feared it could spread the deadly disease, despite a campaign to spare him by animal rights activists. Protesters trying to save the dog, a mixed breed mutt named Excalibur, scuffled with police as they attempted to stop health department officials from removing the animal from the nurse Teresa Romero's apartment in Alcorcon on the outskirts of the Spanish capital. Two people were injured as officers carried away some of the dozens of activists who blocked a white veterinary van from entering the gated complex where the apartment is located, according to an AFP photographer at the scene. Police said they had no reports of any injuries. Just 40 minutes after the dog was removed from the apartment, Madrid's regional government issued a statement saying it had been put down. The dog had been put to sleep "to avoid suffering," the statement said. The regional government obtained a court order on Tuesday to euthanise the dog, saying there was a risk it could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Animal rights protest Animal rights groups said there was no evidence that the Ebola virus could be transmitted from dogs to humans. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) said it was "sad to hear" that the dog had been put down. "The last thing that this nurse needs is to learn that a family member has been lost, even if, as we all hope, her own life is saved," the director of the British branch of the animal rights group, Mimi Bekhechi, said. The dog's owner, Romero, in her 40s, was part of a medical team that treated two Spanish priests who were brought back from west Africa for treatment for Ebola but both died. She was diagnosed with the disease on Monday, becoming the first known case of Ebola being transmitted outside of Africa, where a months long outbreak has killed nearly 3,900 people and infected at least twice as many. Her husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine as a precaution, contacted Spanish media to object to the decision by Madrid's regional government to have the dog put down. "The dog is fine. He has the whole house to himself, with the open terrace so he can do his business," he said in a telephone interview with El Mundo newspaper from his hospital room. He said the dog had no contact with the outside world, had enough food and water inside the apartment to last for several weeks and therefore presented little risk to public health. "Are they going to put me to sleep, too?" Limon said. An online petition on the website Change.org, demanding that the dog be put in quarantine instead of being put down, had gathered 374,000 signatures on Wednesday. "This is not 'just' a dog. For this couple he is one of the family," the petition read.
The dog owned by the Spanish nurse who became the first person to contract Ebola in Europe was on Wednesday night put down by order of health officials in Madrid despite a furious campaign by animal lovers. Excalibur, the 12 year old rescue dog of infected nurse Maria Teresa Romero Ramos and her husband Javier Limon, was destroyed as a precautionary measure by authorities battling to limit the spread of Ebola. But the decision enraged animal rights protesters who had clashed with police as they blockaded the apartment building in the Madrid suburb of Alcorcon where the dog had been locked up since both his owners were quarantined. Campaigners had hoped for a last minute reprieve after the rector of the Complutense University of Madrid where Excalibur was ordered to be taken to be destroyed refused to allow the dog to be "sacrificed" there. A petition, organised online at change.org was approaching 400,000 signatures. A Facebook page, set up to campaign on the animal's behalf, had over 86,000 "likes" and the Twitter hashtag "Save Excalibur" SalvarExcalibur was being widely spread. Over 120,000 tweets mentioning the mongrel were sent in the past 24 hours. Related Articles What next for America's efforts to control Ebola? 08 Oct 2014 Ebola crisis Britain urged to bring in airport screening like US 08 Oct 2014 America's first Ebola victim Thomas Eric Duncan dies in Dallas 08 Oct 2014 Ebola crisis Hundreds of British troops sent to tackle deadly outbreak 08 Oct 2014 Healthy boy barred from UK school amid Ebola 'hysteria' 08 Oct 2014 Liberia attacks British Airways for suspending flights to Ebola hit country 08 Oct 2014 The fate of the dog became a flashpoint in a city where anger was mounting over the authorities handling of the Ebola outbreak. Mr Limon highlighted the dog's case in an interview with Spanish newspaper El Mundo, in which he begged the vets not to destroy the animal. "The dog is fine," he said. "Are they going to put me to sleep, too?" World experts on Ebola have argued that the dog should be kept alive, even if infected, so that more can be understood about the virus. "I would recommend keeping him in quarantine and under observation in a specific site but not killing him," said Eric Leroy, who studied Ebola transmission between dogs and humans in Gabon in 2001. "It's a precious opportunity to see if dogs can play a key role in the propagation of Ebola." Annimal charity PETA said "PETA is sad to hear that a dearly loved dog was destroyed because of the Ebola scare, even though no one can point to any evidence that dogs can transmit Ebola and efforts could have been made to quarantine him. "The last thing that this nurse needs is to learn that a family member has been lost, even if, as we all hope, her own life is saved. We appeal for common sense and mercy to prevail if such a case arises in the future."
Protesters trying to save the dog, a mixed breed mutt named Excalibur, scuffled with police as they attempted to stop health department officials from removing the animal from the nurse Teresa Romero's apartment in Alcorcon on the outskirts of the Spanish capital. Two people were injured as officers carried away some of the dozens of activists who blocked a white veterinary van from entering the gated complex where the apartment is located, according to an AFP photographer at the scene. Police said they had no reports of any injuries. Just 40 minutes after the dog was removed from the apartment, Madrid's regional government issued a statement saying it had been put down. The dog had been put to sleep "to avoid suffering," the statement said. Just really not up for executing Ebola victim's dogs without medical cause SalvemosaExcalibur http t.co EGFSD9Zu4r pic.twitter.com Hsv0ZAdbD7 Rebecca Wigmore ( beckwig) October 8, 2014 The regional government obtained a court order on Tuesday to euthanise the dog, saying there was a risk it could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Animal rights protest Animal rights groups said there was no evidence that the Ebola virus could be transmitted from dogs to humans. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) said it was "sad to hear" that the dog had been put down. "The last thing that this nurse needs is to learn that a family member has been lost, even if, as we all hope, her own life is saved," the director of the British branch of the animal rights group, Mimi Bekhechi, said. RIP Excalibur pawcircle RT ChatteMuse and the angels wept CM http t.co zKmHWPb1AA dana moody ( danapixie) October 9, 2014 The dog's owner, Romero, in her 40s, was part of a medical team that treated two Spanish priests who were brought back from west Africa for treatment for Ebola but both died. She was diagnosed with the disease on Monday, becoming the first known case of Ebola being transmitted outside of Africa, where a months long outbreak has killed nearly 3,900 people and infected at least twice as many. Her husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine as a precaution, contacted Spanish media to object to the decision by Madrid's regional government to have the dog put down. "The dog is fine. He has the whole house to himself, with the open terrace so he can do his business," he said in a telephone interview with El Mundo newspaper from his hospital room. He said the dog had no contact with the outside world, had enough food and water inside the apartment to last for several weeks and therefore presented little risk to public health. "Are they going to put me to sleep, too?" Limon said. An online petition on the website Change.org, demanding that the dog be put in quarantine instead of being put down, had gathered 374,000 signatures on Wednesday. "This is not 'just' a dog. For this couple he is one of the family," the petition read.
Animal rights activists have clashed with police in a bid to save the dog's life(Getty) Animal rights advocates have staged a protest in the streets of Spain to prevent the dog of Teresa Romero Ramos, a nurse's assistant who tested positive to Ebola in Madrid, from being killed. The dog, named Excalibur, was taken by authorities after a court order allowed them to enter Romero Ramos's premises to take the pet, on suspicions that he might have contracted the deadly virus too. Protests erupted outside the woman's apartment in Alcorcon, briefly stopping a police van pulling away with the animal. Demonstrators chanted "assassins" while trying to stop the police from driving away with the dog. Romero Ramos's husband, Javier Limon Romero, had launched a plea to save the dog and hundreds of netizens joined Twitter campaign SalvemosAExcalibur, or Let's Save Excalibur, to urge the authorities to spare the dog's life. Nearly 400,000 people also signed an online petition. Romero Ramos also told Spanish newspaper El Mundo that there was no indication that Excalibur was infected with Ebola. However, the dog was put down on Wednesday 9 October . Researchers have said dogs can transmit the deadly virus to humans, while previous research has shown the animals do not get sick from Ebola and that the virus can be cleared from the animal. Romero Ramos, who is in quarantine with her husband, worked as a nursing assistant in Madrid's Carlos III hospital and assisted two missionaries who died from Ebola after returning from Sierra Leone in West Africa. According to latest developments, she contracted the virus when she touched her face with the gloves she used to attend one of the two missionaries. She was the first person believed to have contracted the virus outside west Africa, where the disease has killed more than 3,400 people since last January. Reports emerged on Tuesday 7 October that two other people suspected of being infected were admitted to hospital in Spain. RelatedEbola Dog Excalibur Police and Protesters Clash in Madrid as Nurse's Pet is EuthanisedEbola 'Attack Patients with Napalm to Defeat Virus' Todd Kincannon, Pro Life Politician SaysNigeria Is Ebola Meme Being Used to Spread Fears Virus 'Was Created by White People'?Liberia Ebola Patient Flees Hospital to Buy Food at MarketEbola UK Airports Pressured to Screen all Passengers for Deadly VirusEbola UN Warns of Uncontrolled Spread Unless More International Support Comes In
THE dog of a Spanish nurse infected with Ebola in Madrid has been put down by health authorities who feared it could spread the deadly disease, despite a campaign to spare him by animal rights activists. Protesters trying to save the dog, a mixed breed mutt named Excalibur, scuffled with police as they tried to stop health department officials from removing the animal from Teresa Romero's apartment in the city of Alcorc n on the outskirts of the Spanish capital. Two people were injured as officers carried away some of the dozens of activists who blocked a veterinary van from entering the apartment's gated complex, according to an AFP photographer at the scene. Local police said they had no reports of any injuries. IN QUARANTINE Australian nurse may have ebola EBOLA FEARS Temperatures to be tested at airports Just 40 minutes after the dog was removed from the apartment, Madrid's regional government issued a statement saying it had been put down. The dog had been put to sleep "to avoid suffering," the statement said. The regional government obtained a court order on Tuesday to euthanise the dog, saying there was a risk it could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Animal rights group Pacma said there was no evidence of the Ebola virus being transmitted from dogs to humans. Animal rights groups said there was no evidence that the Ebola virus could be transmitted from dogs to humans. CDC 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa COMMENT BELOW Are the animal rights protesters in the right? People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) said it was "sad to hear" that the dog had been put down. "The last thing that this nurse needs is to learn that a family member has been lost, even if, as we all hope, her own life is saved," the director of the British branch of the animal rights group, Mimi Bekhechi, said An online petition on Change.org demanding that the dog be put in quarantine instead of being put down gathered 374,000 signatures. Its owner, Romero, in her 40s, was part of a medical team that treated two Spanish priests who were brought back from west Africa for treatment for Ebola but both died. She was diagnosed with the disease on Monday, becoming the first known case of Ebola being transmitted outside of West Africa, where a months long outbreak has killed nearly 3500 people and infected at least twice as many. Her husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine as a precaution, contacted Spanish media to object to the decision by Madrid's regional government to have the dog put down and questioned if he, also, would be put to sleep.
Veterinarian Jos Manuel S nchez Vizca no is not someone who can be accused of wanting to kill animals indiscriminately. Professor of animal health at Madrid's Complutense University and the founder and designer of Spain's first high safety biological lab in Valdeolmos, outside of Madrid, he has conducted research that has helped all but eradicate such dangerous animal diseases as African horse sickness, African swine fever and classical swine fever. Nevertheless, S nchez Vizca no stands by his decision to put down Excalibur, the 12 year old dog of the nursing assistant infected with Ebola in Madrid. "The dog had to be destroyed," he said. "The ideal thing would have been to transfer it in biosafe conditions, something we don't have in Spain, put it under observation, wait 21 days, and discharge it, but we don't have appropriate installations in Spain in which to leave the animal," he says. Spain lacks the kind of level four maximum biosafety animal facilities that exist in the likes of Germany and the United States, which feature airlock entrances, double filters each able to capture 99.99 percent of viruses and bacteria, incinerators for destroying dead animals on the spot, suits with segregated oxygen supplies, and chemical showers for disinfecting, among other protection measures. The ones that come closest in Spain are S nchez Vizca no's lab at Valdeolmos and another in Bellaterra, Barcelona, he says. "From a biosafety point of view, putting the dog down was the best decision, a harsh and sad one, but there was no other option. You couldn't run the risk that carers and veterinarians might be infected," says S nchez Vizca no, who was one of the experts consulted by Madrid health authorities before the dog was destroyed on Wednesday. "Curing that animal, with that virus, would have been the best achievement of my life, but if you don't have the means, you cannot take the risk," he explains. Veterinarian Luis Mart n Otero, the coordinator of the Biological Alert Laboratory at the Complutense University, which the Madrid regional government entrusted with destroying the dog, said no blood samples would be taken to see if it had the virus. The risk of taking a sample is much greater than putting the animal to sleep. "Ebola is a level four virus, which obliges you take maximum safety and protection measures. The place where you should and can work with the virus is in a level four laboratory," he says.
Protesters trying to save the dog, a mixed breed mutt named Excalibur, scuffled with police as they attempted to stop health department officials from removing the animal from the nurse Teresa Romero's apartment in Alcorcon on the outskirts of the Spanish capital. Two people were injured as officers carried away some of the dozens of activists who blocked a white veterinary van from entering the gated complex where the apartment is located, according to an AFP photographer at the scene. Police said they had no reports of any injuries. Just 40 minutes after the dog was removed from the apartment, Madrid's regional government issued a statement saying it had been put down. The dog had been put to sleep "to avoid suffering," the statement said. The regional government obtained a court order on Tuesday to euthanise the dog, saying there was a risk it could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Animal rights protest Animal rights groups said there was no evidence that the Ebola virus could be transmitted from dogs to humans. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) said it was "sad to hear" that the dog had been put down. "The last thing that this nurse needs is to learn that a family member has been lost, even if, as we all hope, her own life is saved," the director of the British branch of the animal rights group, Mimi Bekhechi, said. The dog's owner, Romero, in her 40s, was part of a medical team that treated two Spanish priests who were brought back from west Africa for treatment for Ebola but both died. She was diagnosed with the disease on Monday, becoming the first known case of Ebola being transmitted outside of Africa, where a months long outbreak has killed nearly 3,900 people and infected at least twice as many. Her husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine as a precaution, contacted Spanish media to object to the decision by Madrid's regional government to have the dog put down. "The dog is fine. He has the whole house to himself, with the open terrace so he can do his business," he said in a telephone interview with El Mundo newspaper from his hospital room. He said the dog had no contact with the outside world, had enough food and water inside the apartment to last for several weeks and therefore presented little risk to public health. "Are they going to put me to sleep, too?" Limon said. An online petition on the website Change.org, demanding that the dog be put in quarantine instead of being put down, had gathered 374,000 signatures on Wednesday. "This is not 'just' a dog. For this couple he is one of the family," the petition read.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 30 (Xinhua) The first case of Ebola in the United States has been diagnosed, U.S. health authorities confirmed Tuesday. Tom Frieden, director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), told a press conference that the patient is an adult who developed symptoms days after coming to Texas from Liberia to visit family here in the U.S.. "I have no doubt that we will control this case of Ebola so it does not spread widely in this country," Frieden said. The Texas Department of State Health Services said in a statement that the patient was admitted into isolation Sunday at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas and that the CDC confirmed the positive result Tuesday. U.S. hospitals have treated five Ebola patients but they are all infected with the deadly virus in West Africa and then brought home for treatment.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirms a patient at a hospital in Dallas, Texas, was diagnosed with the Ebola virus. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed Tuesday that a patient at a hospital in Dallas, Texas, was diagnosed with the Ebola virus. It is the first case of the virus detected in the U.S., CDC officials said. At a press conference in Atlanta, CDC Director Thomas Frieden said that the patient came from Liberia and he was in Texas visiting family. Declining to give details about the patient, who was not involved in fighting the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, Frieden said besides taking care of the patient, the health agency would work to identify anyone with whom the patient may have had contact. Those who showed symptoms would be isolated, he said. According to Dr. David Lakey, Commissioner at the Texas Department of State Health Services, who joined the conference via phone, there is no other suspected case in Texas. Dr. Frieden noted that Ebola takes 21 days to show symptoms and infect the host and that the virus is not transmitted before the host becomes ill. Frieden added that there was "zero risk of transmission to anyone on the flight" that the patient traveled on because he landed long before any symptoms appeared. The Ebola virus can be transmitted four days after an infected person becomes sick. The virus has killed more than 3,000 people across West Africa and infected several Americans who have traveled to the region.
Health workers remove the body of Prince Nyentee, a 29 year old man whom local residents said died of Ebola virus in Monrovia on Sept. 11, 2014. Reuters James Giahyue A team for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention flew down to Dallas after a patient was placed under evaluation after exhibiting symptoms of the Ebola virus. The patient, who had been in Liberia, is the first person confirmed sick with Ebola in the United States. In a Tuesday evening press conference, Dr. Tom Frieden, director of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, carefully discussed the patient's deteriorating health and the possible public health issues created by the illness. The patient, said Dr. Frieden, arrived in the U.S. on Sept. 20, on a flight from Liberia the patient was not exhibiting symptoms of the disease while in transit meaning that no one else on the plane was at risk for the infection but began developing symptoms on Sept. 24. (Because of medical privacy laws, Dr. Frieden did not divulge any information about the patient's age or identity, but did refer to the patient repeatedly as "he.") The patient was not admitted and put into isolation in Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas until Sept. 28 That means that people who came in contact with him during the four day period between the 24th to the 28th may have been exposed to the virus. Frieden says the patient was in contact with "a handful" of people including family members before receiving proper medical care and being isolated to prevent any further infections. Frieden emphasized that Ebola is not easy to catch. He said a three pronged plan would be put into place to prevent the disease spreading further Caring for the patient (who is seriously ill) "contact tracing" everyone who may have had contact with the patient during the crucial period and monitoring those people for 21 days, the number of days it takes for symptoms to begin. The CDC has deployed a team to Texas that will work alongside the hospital and local health officials to help contain the disease. "We will control this case of Ebola so it does not spread widely in this country," Frieden said of their procedure. " There is no doubt in my mind that we will stop it here."
U.S. medical authorities have diagnosed the country's first case of Ebola. The head of the Centers for Disease Control, Dr. Tom Frieden, confirmed Tuesday that the potentially deadly virus was found in a male patient who was infected in Liberia. He started showing symptoms days after he arrived in the southwestern city of Dallas, Texas on Sept. 20. Frieden said the unidentified patient is in strict isolation at Texas Heath Presbyterian Hospital. Officials are trying to find all those who may have come in contact with him. Frieden said the CDC does not believe there is a threat to other airline passengers who might have flown with the patient to the U.S. The CDC chief said there is no doubt authorities will contain the virus, so that it will not widely spread in the U.S. "It is certainly possible someone who had contact with this individual could develop Ebola in the coming weeks," Frieden told a press conference. "I have no doubt we will stop this in its tracks in the United States." Although American health workers who were diagnosed in Africa were flown back to the U.S. for treatment, the Texas man is the first patient to be diagnosed inside the United States. President Barack Obama has been briefed about the details of the case, the White House said on Tuesday. Ebola has killed nearly 3,100 people and infected more than 6,500 in West Africa. Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone are the most affected countries. The virus causes uncontrollable internal bleeding, vomiting and diarrhea. There is no specific treatment. It is spread by direct contact with the body fluids of infected patients. The CDC said earlier Tuesday that it looks like the Ebola outbreak in Nigeria has been contained. Officials say there have been no new cases since Aug. 31 and the 21 day monitoring period of those who came in contact with those infected ends Thursday. There were 19 conformed Ebola cases in Nigeria. The CDC also says Senegal avoided an Ebola epidemic when authorities there isolated that country's only Ebola case in August. Some information for this report provided by Reuters.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has confirmed the first case of Ebola virus diagnosed in United States. The patient, still not identified, had recently flown here from Liberia to visit family, officials said. He was admitted on Monday to an isolation unit at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas to betested for Ebola after he began exhibiting symptoms. "This is the first case of Ebola diagnosed in the U.S., and the first case of this strain of Ebola diagnosed outside Africa," Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the CDC, said at a news conference Tuesday evening. Frieden sought to reassure the public, stating "I have no doubt that we will control this importation, this case of Ebola, so it will not spread widely in this country." He acknowledged it was possible that "a handful" of others in close contact with the patient may have been exposed. He said those people would be tracked down, and he expressed confidence the disease would be contained. "I have no doubt we will stop it here," he said.
An adult who recently traveled from West Africa to Texas has tested positive for Ebola, the first case to be diagnosed in the U.S., health officials said Tuesday. The patient developed symptoms of the viral disease days after landing in Texas and was admitted into isolation on Sunday at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, the Texas Department of State Health Services said. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta confirmed Tuesday that the patient had tested positive for Ebola. The patient took a flight that left Liberia on Sept. 19 and arrived in the U.S. on Sept. 20, CDC Director Tom Frieden said in a news conference Tuesday. The patient became ill on Sept. 24 and was admitted to the hospital on Sept. 28, he said. Dr. Frieden and Texas health officials wouldn't provide any information about the patient, including the person's health status or nationality. Dr. Frieden declined to answer repeated questions as to whether the patient had taken a commercial flight to Dallas. Cameron McWhirter contributed to this article. An expanded version of this report appears on WSJ.com.
DALLAS Health officials say a patient at a Dallas hospital who has tested positive for Ebola arrived in Texas from Liberia earlier this month and showed no symptoms while on the plane. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Dr. Tom Frieden said Tuesday that officials "don't believe there is any risk to anyone who was on the flight at that time." Frieden says the patient came to the U.S. to visit family and arrived on Sept. 20. The patient sought care last Friday and has been hospitalized in isolation since the weekend. State health officials say no other cases are suspected in Texas. The patient is the first case of the disease to be diagnosed in the United States.
Secret Service Director Julia Pierson leaves the hearing room on Capitol Hill in Washington, Tuesday, Sept. 30, 2014, after she testified before the House Oversight Committee about details surrounding a security breach at the White House when a man climbed over a fence, sprinted across the north lawn and dash deep into the executive mansion before finally being subdued. Director of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Dr. Tom Frieden speaks during a news conference after confirming that a patient at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital has tested positive for Ebola, the first case of the disease to be diagnosed in the United States, announced Tuesday, Sept. 30, 2014, in Atlanta. The person, an adult who was not publicly identified, developed symptoms days after returning to Texas from Liberia and showed no symptoms on the plane, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
At a press conference this afternoon, Tom Frieden, the director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), announced the first case of Ebola from the current epidemic who was diagnosed outside of Africa. The patient arrived in Dallas, Texas, on 20 September to visit relatives. Until today, the handful of people with Ebola in the United States were all diagnosed in Africa, carefully transported, and immediately provided with care in isolation units at hospitals. The new patient had his temperature taken before boarding the flight out of Liberia on 19 September, U.S. officials say, and had no disease symptoms at the time. He first started feeling ill on 24 September, sought medical care two days later, and was hospitalized on 28 September. Labs at the CDC and the Texas Department of State Health Services both reported that his blood tested positive today for the Ebola strain circulating in West Africa. Two ScienceInsider reporters called in to the press conference, but there was so much interest from the media that they did not get a chance to ask a question. Here, however, are some of the questions they would like to have asked.
"There is no doubt in my mind that we will stop it," said Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease ControlCONNECT 1761 TWEET 94 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE DALLAS A patient in a Dallas hospital was confirmed Tuesday to have the deadly Ebola virus, the Centers for Disease Control said Tuesday. Within hours, a team of CDC investigators arrived in North Texas to begin working on the first ever case of this strain of the Ebola virus confirmed in the U.S. The Dallas patient remains in "strict isolation" at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas. Officials said there are no plans to transfer the him to a specialized hospital with a biocontainment unit at this time. Officials would not confirm or deny if he was an American citizen, saying only he was "visiting family in the U.S." Gov. Rick Perry planned to visit Dallas on Wednesday to evaluate the response to this health emergency. "I have no doubt that we will control this case of Ebola, so that it does not spread widely in this country," said Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at a Tuesday afternoon news conference in Atlanta. "It is certainly possible that someone who has had contact with this patient could develop Ebola. But there is no doubt in my mind that we will stop it here." The Dallas Fire Rescue crew that transported the Ebola patient on Sunday is now under quarantine. The city has activated its Emergency Operations Center on "Level 2 High Readiness" in response to Tuesday's developments. According to the CDC, the patient acquired the virus in West Africa, though they are not sure how he was infected. He was not involved in stopping the Ebola outbreak in Africa, where the disease has claimed more than 3,000 lives. The patient traveled by commercial airline to visit family in the U.S., but Frieden said they will not release the flight number unless the CDC receives additional information that would mean those on the flight were at risk of infection. Frieden said based on the information they have, the patient would not have been at the stage of the virus in which he could transmit it to others at the time of the flight. "There is zero risk of transmission on the flight," Frieden said. "He was checked for fever before getting on the flight." Frieden also gave a brief timeline of the patient's infection in his comments Tuesday afternoon. September 19 The adult patient boards a flight to the U.S. in Liberia after being screened for Ebola symptomsSeptember 20 The patient arrives in the United StatesSeptember 24 Patient shows first symptoms of EbolaSeptember 26 Patient seeks initial medical careSeptember 28 Patient admitted to Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas A wrapup of the latest information about a patient at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas who has a confirmed case of the Ebola virus. A Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital spokesman said the patient has been in isolation since he arrived on Sunday, and hospital officials had been "meeting for weeks in anticipation of such an event." He added that the facility has a "robust infection control system" in place. Dr. Frieden said he believes "a handful" of people had contact with the patient between the September 24 28, including family members and "a couple" of community members. Those people are to be monitored by the CDC starting Tuesday. The virus is not contagious until symptoms are present. Early symptoms of Ebola include sudden fever, fatigue, and headache. Symptoms may appear anywhere from two to 21 days after exposure. Frieden said the next steps are to care for the patient and keep to a minimum the chance the virus may spread, while identifying all people the patient was in contact with while he could transmit the virus. Those people will be monitored for 21 days and isolated if they develop a fever during that time. "Contact tracing is something we do day in and day out, and something we do well," Frieden said. Frieden conceded that others may have been infected in the United States, but said there was "no doubt" in his mind that the infection will be contained to the current patient and anyone he may have had contact with. Hospital officials also said the patient will not be given ZMapp, the experimental serum given to Dr. Kenneth Brantly and Nancy Writebol, American aid workers who caught the virus in Africa and were later treated in the U.S. The supplies of ZMapp have run out. "This person is being isolated, and we are evaluating the situation, and we'll act accordingly," said Dr. C.J. Perkins of Dallas County Health and Human Services. While the situation is serious, Dallas County officials stress the conditions in the United States are a world away from the developing countries devastated by Ebola, and that every hospital in North Texas should already be equipped to contain a contagious disease. "It is easier to get the flu than to get Ebola, so Dallas County residents should go about their daily activities we don't feel that there is a public health threat," said Dallas County Health and Human Services Director Zachary Thompson. State health officials said no other cases are suspected in Texas. Specimens from the patient were tested by a state laboratory and confirmed in a separate test by the Centers for Disease Control, said Carrie Williams, spokeswoman for the Texas Department of State Health Services. Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas, located at Greenville Avenue and Walnut Hill Lane in Northeast Dallas, said it's complying with all recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and the Texas Department of Health to ensure the safety of other patients and medical staff. Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital officials said the staff that treated the patient will be closely observed by the CDC, but stressed that personnel were immediately suspicious of Ebola when the patient described his symptoms and background, and that the virus can only be spread by direct contact with bodily fluids, which they don't believe happened in this case. Dallas County Health and Human Services officials told News 8 Tuesday the CDC had mobilized a group of epidemiologists who specialize in viral containment. Thompson said Dallas County is ready to care for the patient. "This is not Africa," Thompson said. "We have a great infrastructure to deal with an outbreak." Ebola has infected 6,553 people and has killed 3,083 in the three countries hit hardest by the epidemic Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia the World Health Organization says. The number of cases has been doubling every three weeks, and the CDC estimates that the disease could affect up to 1.4 million people by January if it's not quickly put under control. Twelve other people in the U.S. have been tested for Ebola since July 27, according to the CDC. All of those tests were negative. Frieden said that in the past, there have been five cases of patients with similar hemorrhagic fevers in the U.S. including Lassa fever and Marburg virus and none of them infected anyone else. Four American aid workers who became infected while volunteering in West Africa have been treated in special isolation facilities in hospitals in Atlanta and Nebraska, and a U.S. doctor exposed to the virus in Sierra Leone is under observation in a similar facility at the National Institutes of Health. Fort Worth physician Dr. Kent Brantly, who became infected while working in Liberia, recovered after being moved to a hospital in Atlanta. The U.S. has only four such isolation units, but the CDC has insisted that any hospital can safely care for someone with Ebola. President Obama has committed more than 750 million in resources and is deploying 3,000 troops to help combat the spread of Ebola abroad. Sen. Chris Coons, D Del., noted that Congress also authorized 58 million in funding for the Department of Health and Human Services to expedite development, testing and production of a vaccine and treatment. Several other U.S. hospitals have previously raised alerts in connection with patients who presented Ebola like symptoms, but all those cases tested negative for the virus. Since the summer months, U.S. health officials have been preparing for the possibility that an individual traveler could unknowingly arrive with the infection. Health authorities have advised hospitals on how to prevent the virus from spreading within their facilities. People boarding planes in the outbreak zone are checked for fever, but that does not guarantee that an infected person won't get through. Ebola is not contagious until symptoms begin, and it takes close contact with bodily fluids to spread. The Associated Press, USA TODAY's Liz Szabo and News 8's Sebastian Robertson contributed to this story MORE Stories about the Ebola outbreak MORE Fast facts on Ebola LATEST CDC Ebola information Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital location CONNECT 1761 TWEET 94 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story http www.wfaa.com story news health 2014 09 29 dallas presbyterian hospital ebola patient isolation 16460629
President Barack Obama on Tuesday discussed "stringent isolation protocols" with the head of the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to limit the risk of more Ebola cases after a diagnosis was made in Dallas, the White House said. Obama was briefed on the Dallas case by Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control. Read MoreFirst confirmed case of Ebola confirmed in the United States CDC Obama and Frieden "discussed the stringent isolation protocols under which the patient is being treated as well as ongoing efforts to trace the patient's contacts to mitigate the risk of additional cases," the White House said. "Dr. Frieden noted that the CDC had been prepared for an Ebola case in the United States, and that we have the infrastructure in place to respond safely and effectively," the statement said. Follow us on Twitter CNBCWorld
The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) yesterday evening announced the first case of Ebola to be diagnosed outside Africa during the current outbreak, which has so far killed more than 3,000 people this year. The CDC said the patient left Liberia on 19 September, but did not develop symptoms until 24 September, when he was already in Dallas. He was admitted to the Texas Health Presbyterian hospital in Dallas on Sunday, 27 September. The possibility of treating the patient with experimental therapies was being discussed with the patient's family. If the Texas patient receives the experimental treatment for Ebola, he will be the fifth to do so in the United States (a sixth American a carrier of dual American Liberian citizenship who worked for Liberia's Ministry of the Treasury contracted the disease in Monrovia in July and dies a few days later in a Lagos, Nigeria hospital). The FDA has issued warning letters to three privately held companies marketing what they claim are treatments to prevent or treat Ebola. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) yesterday evening announced the first case of Ebola to be diagnosed outside Africa during the current outbreak, which has so far killed more than 3,000 people this year. On Monday the CDC said that its virus proliferation models, which take into account the pace and pattern of spread of the virus since the it was discovered in Guinea in March, show that unless comprehensive new interventions to stop the spread pf the virus are launched, there will be at least 1.4 million cases of Ebola in Liberia and Sierra Leone by 20 December 2015 of which, at a minimum, 70 percent will die. The model does not include Guinea because the Guinea government has been unreliable in reporting cases of infection in the country, and for its own reasons has been providing figures which scientists consider to be improbably low. The CDC has not identified the patient, who is being treated in Dallas, Texas. The CDC said the patient left Liberia on 19 September, but did not develop symptoms until 24 September, when he was already in Dallas. He was admitted to the Texas Health Presbyterian hospital in Dallas on Sunday, 27 September. Thomas Frieden, the director of the CDC, said the patient was being treated in strict isolation, and that CDC will follow "tried and true" protocols to ensure that the disease would not spread in the United States. "I have no doubt that we will control this case of Ebola so that it does not spread widely in this country," he told a news conference. Frieden told reporters that the CDC believed it was the first case of Ebola to be diagnosed outside Africa in the current outbreak. "This is the first patient diagnosed outside of Africa to our knowledge with this particular strain of Ebola," he said. The only retails about the patient the CDC released were that he was not involved in the public health response to the crisis in Liberia, and was visiting family in the United States. His citizenship was not disclosed. "The president and director Frieden discussed the stringent isolation protocols under which the patient is being treated as well as ongoing efforts to trace the patient's contacts to mitigate the risk of additional cases," a White House spokesman said.
Claim The Centers For Disease Control confirmed that a patient in Dallas has tested positive for Ebola. Example Collected via email, September 2014 Origins On 30 September 2014, CDC officials confirmed that a patient in Dallas, Texas tested positive for the Ebola virus. The patient left Liberia on 19 September and arrived in the United States on 20 September. On 26 September the patient noticed the onset of Ebola symptoms, and he was admitted to Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital on 28 September. During a press conference on 30 September, Dr. Thomas Frieden, Director of the CDC, sought to reassure Americans concerned about an Ebola outbreak. Frieden said that he is confident the Ebola patient was sufficiently isolated, although family members may have been exposed to the virus Two missionaries who worked in active Ebola outbreak areas, Dr. Kent Brantly and Nancy Writebol, were transported back to the United States for experimental treatments after contracting the virus earlier in 2014. Both are virus free and recovering well. The Ebola virus is spread only through close, direct contact and exposure to bodily fluids. Symptoms of Ebola usually appear within 10 days of infection, though the incubation period can be as long as 21 days. Last updated 30 September 2014
The first case of the deadly Ebola virus diagnosed on US soil has been confirmed in Dallas, Texas. Officials at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital say the unidentified patient is being kept in isolation. The man is thought to have contracted the virus in Liberia before travelling to the US nearly two weeks ago. More than 3,000 people have already died of Ebola in West Africa and a small number of US aid workers have recovered after being flown to the US. "An individual travelling from Liberia has been diagnosed with Ebola in the United States," Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Thomas Frieden told reporters on Tuesday. According to Mr Frieden, the unnamed patient left Liberia on 19 September and arrived in the US the next day to visit relatives, without displaying any symptoms of the virus. Symptoms of the virus became apparent on 24 September, and on 28 September he was admitted to a Texas hospital and put in isolation. A hospital official told reporters on Tuesday the facility already had procedures in place to deal with any such potential cases. Preliminary information indicates the unnamed patient was not involved in treating Ebola infected patients while in Liberia. Health officials are working to identify all people who came into contact with the unnamed patient while he was infectious. Those people will then be monitored for 21 days to see if an Ebola related fever develops. According to Mr Frieden, it is possible a family member who came in direct contact with the patient may develop Ebola in the coming weeks. But "the bottom line here is I have no doubt that we will control this importation, this case of Ebola, so it does not spread widely in this country," he added. "We will stop it here." The World Health Organization (WHO) says more than 3,000 people have died of the virus so far, mostly in Liberia. Earlier on Tuesday, the CDC said the Ebola virus seemed to be contained in Nigeria and Senegal, with no new cases reported there for almost a month. It is the world's most deadly outbreak of the virus.
Aid worker Nancy Writebol was flown to Atlanta in early August The first case of the deadly Ebola virus diagnosed on US soil has been confirmed in Dallas, Texas. Officials at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital say the unidentified patient is being kept in isolation. The man is thought to have contracted the virus in Liberia before travelling to the US nearly two weeks ago. More than 3,000 people have already died of Ebola in West Africa and a small number of US aid workers have recovered after being flown to the US. "An individual travelling from Liberia has been diagnosed with Ebola in the United States," Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Thomas Frieden told reporters on Tuesday. According to Frieden, the unnamed patient left Liberia on 19 September and arrived in the US the next day to visit relatives, without displaying any symptoms of the virus. Symptoms of the virus became apparent on 24 September, and on 28 September he was admitted to a Texas hospital and put in isolation. A hospital official told reporters on Tuesday the facility already had procedures in place to deal with any such potential cases. Preliminary information indicates the unnamed patient was not involved in treating Ebola infected patients while in Liberia. Health officials are working to identify all people who came into contact with the unnamed patient while he was infectious. Those people will then be monitored for 21 days to see if an Ebola related fever develops. According to Frieden, it is possible a family member who came in direct contact with the patient may develop Ebola in the coming weeks. But "the bottom line here is I have no doubt that we will control this importation, this case of Ebola, so it does not spread widely in this country," he added. "We will stop it here." The World Health Organization (WHO) says more than 3,000 people have died of the virus so far, mostly in Liberia. Earlier on Tuesday, the CDC said the Ebola virus seemed to be contained in Nigeria and Senegal, with no new cases reported there for almost a month. It is the world's most deadly outbreak of the virus.
Bishkek (AKIpress) The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) confirmed on Tuesday that a patient infected with Ebola had been diagnosed on U.S. soil for the first time. CDC Director Thomas Frieden told a press conference that he was confident that there would be no major spread of the virus. Frieden said people who had contact with the patient while he could have been infectious were being identified and would be monitored for 21 days to see if they develop a fever. The patient was said to have recently traveled to Liberia. Authorities in West Africa, where Ebola has killed more than 3,000, have struggled to stop the spread of the virus. In a phone call with President Barack Obama, Frieden was reported to have discussed "stringent isolation protocols." Zachary Thompson, director of Dallas County Health and Human Services, said health services in Texas were well equipped to care for the patient. "This is not Africa," he told Dallas radio station WFAA. "We have a great infrastructure to deal with an outbreak." The news came after Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said in a statement on Monday that an unnamed patient, who had been placed in strict isolation, was being tested for the virus. Among the reasons given for the testing to take place were the individual's "symptoms and recent travel history." The hospital said it was following all CDC recommendations to keep the doctors, staff and other patients safe. US hospitals have treated a number of medical workers with Ebola who were flown back home after being diagnosed in West Africa. While 12 other people in the US have been tested for the virus since July 27, results until now have always come back negative. The United Nations, which has been accused of responding too slowly to the Ebola epidemic in West Africa, has launched an emergency response mission to help stem the spread of the disease. The current outbreak, most notably affecting Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea has so far killed more the 3,000 people.
DALLAS (AP) Health officials say a patient at a Dallas hospital who has tested positive for Ebola arrived in Texas from Liberia earlier this month and showed no symptoms while on the plane. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Dr. Tom Frieden said Tuesday that officials "don't believe there is any risk to anyone who was on the flight at that time." Frieden says the patient came to the U.S. to visit family and arrived on Sept. 20. The patient sought care last Friday and has been hospitalized in isolation since the weekend. State health officials say no other cases are suspected in Texas. The patient is the first case of the disease to be diagnosed in the United States.
America's Centre for Disease Control and Prevention has confirmed that a man who flew into Texas from west Africa has tested positive for ebola. It's the first case to be diagnosed in the United States. Meanwhile, the Irish Minister for overseas aid is this morning travelling to the Ebola crippled nation of Sierra Leone, accompanied by the Irish ambassador in the country and a team from Irish Aid. Doctor Thomas Frieden is the director of the CDC. He says they're monitoring people who've come into close contact with the infected man
WASHINGTON A patient in Texas has tested positive for Ebola, becoming the first person diagnosed in the U.S. with the deadly virus, U.S. health authorities said Tuesday. Tom Frieden, director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), told a press conference that the patient is an adult who flew from Liberia to Texas to visit family earlier this month. The patients had no symptoms when leaving West Africa but began to develop symptoms about four days after arriving in the U.S. on Sept. 20, Frieden said. He said the patient was admitted into a hospital in Texas and placed on isolation Sunday and that a CDC laboratory confirmed the positive result Tuesday. "I have no doubt that we will control ... this case of Ebola so it does not spread widely in this country," Frieden said. Frieden noted that it's possible that those who had contact with this patient, including family members, may develop Ebola in the coming weeks but "there is no doubt, in my mind, that we will stop it here." He said the U.S. will identify all people who might have had contact with the patient. The White House said in a statement that President Barack Obama and Frieden had discussed "stringent isolation protocols" to mitigate the risk of additional cases. "Frieden noted that the CDC had been prepared for an Ebola case in the United States, and that we have the infrastructure in place to respond safely and effectively," the statement said. US hospitals have treated five Ebola patients but they are all infected with the deadly virus in West Africa and then brought home for treatment.
ISLAMABAD The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed Tuesday that a patient at a hospital in Dallas, Texas, was diagnosed with the Ebola virus. It is the first case of the virus detected in the US, CDC officials said. At a press conference in Atlanta, CDC Director Thomas Frieden said that the patient came from Liberia and he was in Texas visiting family, Anadolu News Agency Reported. Declining to give details about the patient, who was not involved in fighting the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, Frieden said besides taking care of the patient, the health agency would work to identify anyone with whom the patient may have had contact. Those who showed symptoms would be isolated, he said. According to Dr. David Lakey, Commissioner at the Texas Department of State Health Services, who joined the conference via phone, there is no other suspected case in Texas. Dr. Frieden noted that Ebola takes 21 days to show symptoms and infect the host and that the virus is not transmitted before the host becomes ill. Frieden added that there was "zero risk of transmission to anyone on the flight" that the patient traveled on because he landed long before any symptoms appeared. The Ebola virus can be transmitted four days after an infected person becomes sick. The virus has killed more than 3,000 people across West Africa and infected several Americans who have traveled to the region.
The first case of the deadly Ebola virus diagnosed on US soil has been confirmed in Dallas, Texas. Officials at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital say the unidentified patient is being kept in isolation. The man is thought to have contracted the virus in Liberia before travelling to the US nearly two weeks ago. More than 3,000 people have already died of Ebola in West Africa and a small number of US aid workers have recovered after being flown to the US. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says the Ebola virus seems to have been contained in Nigeria and Senegal, with no new cases reported there for almost a month. "An individual travelling from Liberia has been diagnosed with Ebola in the United States," CDC Director Thomas Frieden told reporters on Tuesday. According to Mr Frieden, the unnamed patient left Liberia on 19 September and arrived in the US the next day to visit relatives, without displaying any symptoms of the virus. Symptoms of the virus became apparent on 24 September, and on 28 September he was admitted to a Texas hospital and put in isolation. The disease, which is not contagious until symptoms appear, is spread via close contact with bodily fluids. Aid workers who caught Ebola in West Africa have come back to the US for treatment but this is the first case of a patient developing the virus on US soil, says the BBC's Alastair Leithead in Los Angeles. A hospital official told reporters on Tuesday the facility already had procedures in place to deal with any such potential cases. Preliminary information indicates that the unnamed patient, who was described as critically ill, was not involved in treating Ebola infected patients while in Liberia. Health officials are working to identify all people who came into contact with the unnamed patient while he was infectious. Those people will then be monitored for 21 days to see if an Ebola related fever develops. According to Mr Frieden, it is possible a family member who came in direct contact with the patient may develop Ebola in the coming weeks. But "the bottom line here is I have no doubt that we will control this importation, this case of Ebola, so it does not spread widely in this country," he added. "We will stop it here." The World Health Organization (WHO) says more than 3,000 people have died of the virus so far, mostly in Liberia. Earlier on Tuesday, the head of a new UN body set up to fight the disease urged more action within the next 60 days. Anthony Banbury told reporters in Ghana that 70 of infected people needed to be receiving treatment and 70 of burials should be done safely within two months. It is the world's most deadly outbreak of the virus. Ebola virus Busting the myths
Medical officials in the United States announced on Tuesday the first case of Ebola to be diagnosed outside Africa during the latest outbreak, which has killed more than 3,000 people this year. The patient, who has not yet been identified, is being treated in Dallas, Texas. The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) said the patient left Liberia in west Africa on 19 September, but did not develop symptoms until a few days after arriving in the US. He was admitted to the Texas Health Presbyterian hospital in Dallas on Sunday. Thomas Frieden, the director of the CDC, said the patient was being treated in strict isolation, and that all measures would be taken to ensure that the disease would not spread in the US. "I have no doubt that we will control this case of Ebola so that it does not spread widely in this country," he told a news conference. The disease has spread rapidly in west Africa, killing more than 3,000 people since the outbreak began in March. Frieden said the CDC believed it was the first case of Ebola to be diagnosed outside Africa in the latest outbreak. "This is the first patient diagnosed outside of Africa to our knowledge with this particular strain of Ebola," he said. The patient's gender was not confirmed, but officials repeatedly used the male personal pronoun at the CDC briefing. Few other details were released the CDC would only confirm that the he was not involved in the public health response to the crisis in Liberia, and was visiting family in the US. His citizenship was not disclosed. The White House said the president had been briefed. "The president and director Frieden discussed the stringent isolation protocols under which the patient is being treated as well as ongoing efforts to trace the patient's contacts to mitigate the risk of additional cases," a White House spokesman said. The patient began developing symptoms, which can include high fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, as well as internal and external bleeding, on 24 September. He sought treatment for the first time on 26 September but was not admitted to hospital until two days later. Specimens from the patient arrived at the CDC in Atlanta on Tuesday, where tests determined he was suffering from Ebola. A state operated laboratory in Texas also concluded that the specimens tested positive for Ebola. Frieden said testing for Ebola is "highly accurate". A spokeswoman for Dallas County health and human services department told the Guardian that it will be "conducting a public health follow up" on the patient which will include investigating travel history and recent contacts. Friedman said there was "zero risk" that the patient could have transmitted the disease on the flight from Liberia to the US, because he was not infectious at the time. Ebola can only be spread through direct contact through blood or bodily fluids, after the first appearance of symptoms. Doctors were discussing with the patient's family the possibility of treating the patient with experimental therapies, Frieden said. He acknowledged that other people who came into contact with the patient could develop the disease. "It is certainly possible that someone who had contact with this individual ... could develop Ebola in the coming weeks," Frieden said. Health officials in Texas attempted to reassure residents. Dr David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas department of state health services, told the CDC briefing "We have no other suspected cases in the state of Texas at this time." Zachary S Thompson, the Dallas county director of health and human services, said "Dallas County residents should be aware that the public health is our number one priority at Dallas Ccounty health and human services. Our staff will continue to work hard to protect the health and welfare of the citizens in Dallas County." The Texas patient is the fifth to receive treatment for Ebola in the US, and the sixth American to contract the disease a civil servant with dual American Liberian citizenship died in Monrovia in July. Aid workers Dr Kent Brantly of Texas and Nancy Writebol were the first Ebola patients to be treated in the US. Brantly and Writebol were treated in a bio containment unit at Emory University hospital in Atlanta. The recovered after receiving doses of an experimental drug which has since been depleted. Brantly recently testified before Congress, imploring the international community to step up its response to the outbreak. Dr Rick Sacra, the third US aid worker to contract Ebola while working at a hospital in Monrovia, was released from Nebraska Medical Center last week. Sacra had gone back to Monrovia after fellow missionaries Brantly and Writebol were diagnosed. In Monrovia, Sacra treated obstetrics patients. A fourth patient is being treated at Emory. The patient's identity has not being disclosed for confidentiality reasons, but he is believed to be a World Health Organization doctor who was treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone.
Now that the first domestic case of Ebola infection has been confirmed in a patient at a Dallas hospital, public health officials will begin the arduous task of tracking the patient's movements to identify any possible exposures to other people. The Dallas Ebola patient wasn't showing signs of sickness while flying in from Liberia. He got the fever after arriving. (Frieden) "The patient was visiting family members and staying with family members who live in this country." And, CDC Director Tom Frieden says others he may have contacted since developing symptoms could have been exposed. (Frieden) "We will contact anyone who we think has any likelihood of having had an exposure to the individual while they were infectious." Though there is great confidence that his isolation care will now prevent further spread. Eben Brown, FOX News Radio. Listen here to FOX News Radio's special coverage of the CDC news conference
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has confirmed that a patient in a Dallas hospital has the Ebola virus, the first person to be diagnosed with the disease in the United States. The unidentified adult patient has been isolated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital of Dallas and has been diagnosed with a strain of Ebola not previously encountered outside of Africa. The patient recently traveled to the United States from Liberia, Thomas Frieden, director of the CDC, said during a Tuesday afternoon press conference. "I have no doubt that we will control this case of Ebola so it doesn't spread widely in this country," Frieden added. "We can stop Ebola in its tracks in this country." Dr. Edward Goodman, epidemiologist at Texas Health Presbyterian said he and his staff not only prepared for an Ebola patient to hit a Dallas hospital, but he expected it. "There are over 4,000 identified cases of Ebola in West Africa," Goodman said. "There's plenty of opportunity for people to fly over and come to any part of the United States." In addition, the CDC and Dallas County Health Department have bombarded physicians with information about how to screen for and evaluate Ebola cases, Goodman said. "If they didn't think it was likely, they wouldn't be doing all of that," he said. The patient had traveled to the United States from the West African nation, described as a hotbed of the virus, to visit friends and family, according to the CDC. Anyone who has come in contact with the patient will be monitored for three weeks to see if they develop fever or other symptoms, Frieden said. That could include a "few" family members, but apparently there hasn't been any significant exposure to the patient. Bill covers health care, telecom, law and education. Subscribe to our email newsletters.
The first case of Ebola has been diagnosed in the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed Tuesday. The infected patient, who is being isolated at Texas Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas, had recently returned from West Africa, but CDC Director Dr. Thomas Frieden said it did not appear that the individual was involved in the response to Ebola. Frieden said the patient left Liberia with no symptoms on Sept. 19 and arrived in the U.S. on Sept. 20. Symptoms began to appear on Sept. 24, and the patient sought care on Sept. 26. The CDC received the patient's blood sample Tuesday morning and confirmed the case that afternoon. Another lab in Texas corroborated the CDC's findings, Frieden said. Frieden said in addition to treating the patient and maximizing his chance of recovery, the CDC's next steps are to identify all people that may have had contact with the patient once he began to exhibit symptoms and became feverish. These people will be closely monitored for symptoms for the next 21 days. "The bottom line here is that i have no doubt that we will control this case of Ebola so it does not spread widely," Frieden said in a conference on Sept. 30. "...It is certainly possible that someone who had contact with this individual ... could develop Ebola within the coming weeks." According to the CDC, this is the largest Ebola outbreak in history and the first ever epidemic. As of Sept. 23 (the latest data available), there have been 6,574 total cases of Ebola, 3,626 of which were confirmed by a laboratory. More than 3,000 have died from the hemorrhagic fever, with the highest death tolls coming from Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone. Want Nashville news in your inbox? Click here to sign up for our email newsletters. Ellie Hensley is an entertainment, health care and general assignment reporter.
US health officials are attempting to hunt down anyone who came into contact with the first man in America to have been diagnosed with the deadly Ebola virus. In an effort to stop the virus from spreading, officials from the US Centers of Disease Control (CDC) have already started tracing those who came into contact with the unnamed patient now being treated at a hospital in Dallas, Texas. The man, who had travelled to the US from Liberia to visit family, was diagnosed with Ebola on Tuesday, and is being kept in isolation in hospital. Health officials are now attempting to identify all the people who came into contact with the man while he was infectious in order to stop any potential outbreak, starting by interviewing the patient and then his family members. CDC director Dr Tom Friedman said it is likely that a "handful" people in the US have been exposed to the virus, including the family members that the patient was staying with. However, officials will try to identify people who may be at primary and secondary levels of risk of infection, through building "concentric circles". The first circle will try to identify all those who could have been exposed to Ebola by the infected patient, and the second circle will encompass all the people that may have interacted with those identified in the first circle. "With that we put together a map essentially that identifies the time, the place, the level of the contact," Dr Frieden said, "then we use a concentric circle approach to identify those contacts who might have had the highest risk of exposure, those with intermediate risk". Those found to be at risk of having been infected will be monitored for at least 21 days, the length of the Ebola incubation period. The paramedics who attended to the patient when he was taken to hospital on Sunday are currently being kept in isolation in their homes and are being monitored for any symptom developments, and the ambulance is in quarantine. Dr Friedman said he did not believe people travelling on the same flight as the patient from Liberia to the US are at risk, as the man will not have become infectious until he started experiencing the symptoms of Ebola.
The head of Atlanta based Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says a seven member team is in Dallas working to locate anyone who might have come in contact with an Ebola patient being treated at a Dallas hospital. The patient has the first case of Ebola identified in the U.S. CDC Director Thomas Frieden said on NBC's Today show the group is talking with the patient's family and anyone who has information about places the patient went and people with whom the person was in contact. When asked how many people have been identified and are being observed, Frieden said "it is a handful."
Update, September 30, 6 15 PM EDT According to officials from the Centers for Disease Control, the patient, a male, arrived in the United States from Liberia on September 20. He planned to visit with family members in Texas. He initially sought treatment at a hospital on September 26 but was sent home, and then was readmitted on September 28. Texas public health officials believe that the patient had contact with "a handful" of people while he was infectious, including family members. The officials are currently in the process of tracing those contacts. CDC officials do not believe that anyone on the flight with him has any risk of contracting Ebola. During a press conference, CDC officials reiterated that Ebola is not transmitted through the air, nor is it possible to catch it from someone who has been exposed but is not yet displaying symptoms. "Ebola is a scary disease," said CDC's Dr. Thomas Frieden. "At the same time, we are stopping it in its tracks in this country." The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has confirmed a case of Ebola in Dallas. While other patients have been flown back to the United States for treatment, this is the first time that a patient has been diagnosed stateside. The patient is being kept in "strict isolation" at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital. While hospital officials are not currently discussing which countries the patient has visited, no doubt US officials will be looking very closely at where he's traveled in the recent past, especially within the United States. The CDC will be holding a press conference on this at 5 30 p.m. Eastern. You can see it live here. Ebola has already infected more than 6,000 people and killed more than 3,000 in West Africa. Quick action prevented the disease from spreading in Senegal and Nigeria, but the disease continues to wreak havoc in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea.
Dr. Edward Goodman (left), epidemiologist at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital of Dallas, discusses the first Ebola case diagnosed in the U.S. A patient in a Dallas hospital who recently traveled to Liberia has been diagnosed with the Ebola virus. The Dallas Business Journal reports the patient is the first in the United States to be diagnosed with the disease. The person has a strain of the disease not previously seen outside of the United States. Dr. Edward Goodman, epidemiologist at Texas Health Presbyterian, said staff there have been preparing to encounter Ebola patients. "We can stop Ebola in its tracks in this country," said Thomas Frieden, director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control.
The first patient to be diagnosed with Ebola outside Africa during the latest outbreak was sent home with a course of antibiotics for two days after seeking medical care at a Dallas hospital last week, a hospital official said. The patient, believed to be male, was admitted to an isolation unit at Texas Health Presbyterian hospital, in Dallas on Sunday, after coming to the same hospital two days before. Edward Goodman, the infectious disease specialist at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, told National Public Radio that the patient's symptoms were not definitive when he was first seen. Goodman said "He was evaluated for his illness, which was very nondescript. He had some laboratory tests, which were not very impressive, and he was dismissed with some antibiotics." Medical officials in the US announced on Tuesday that tests confirmed the man, who had travelled from Liberia, had Ebola. Thomas Frieden, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said the patient was being treated in strict isolation and that all measures would be taken to ensure that the disease would not spread in the US. "I have no doubt that we will control this case of Ebola so that it does not spread widely in this country," he told a news conference on Tuesday. The disease has spread rapidly in west Africa, killing more than 3,000 people since March. However, US authorities are expected to be questioned over why the patient was not isolated immediately when he first arrived at the Texas hospital on Friday. Only patients who are sick with or have died from Ebola can transmit the disease, and it can only be spread through direct contact with blood or bodily fluids. The patient began developing symptoms, which can include high fever, muscle pain, vomiting, diarrhoea, as well as internal and external bleeding, on 24 September. He sought treatment for the first time on 26 September but was not admitted to hospital until two days later. In Dallas, leaders of the 10,000 strong Liberian community were urging calm but told people to be cautious. Stanley Gaye, president of the Liberian Community Association of Dallas Fort Worth, said the Liberian population in North Texas is skeptical of the CDC's assurances, because Ebola has ravaged their country. "We've been telling people to try to stay away from social gatherings," Gaye said at a community meeting on Tuesday evening. Large get togethers are a prominent part of Liberian culture. "We need to know who it is so that they (family members) can all go get tested," Gaye told the Associated Press. "If they are aware, they should let us know." The association's vice president encouraged all who may have come into contact with the virus to visit a doctor, but she warned people not to panic. "We don't want to get a panic going," said vice president Roseline Sayon. "We embrace those people who are coming forward. Don't let the stigma keep you from getting tested." Frieden said the CDC believed it was the first case of Ebola to be diagnosed outside Africa in the latest outbreak. "This is the first patient diagnosed outside of Africa to our knowledge with this particular strain of Ebola," he said. Few details were released about the patient. The patient's gender was not confirmed, but officials repeatedly used the male personal pronoun at the CDC briefing. The CDC would only confirm that the he was not involved in the public health response to the crisis in Liberia, and was visiting family in the US. His citizenship was not disclosed. The White House said the president had been briefed. "The president and Director Frieden discussed the stringent isolation protocols under which the patient is being treated, as well as ongoing efforts to trace the patient's contacts to mitigate the risk of additional cases," a White House spokesman said. Specimens from the patient arrived at the CDC in Atlanta on Tuesday, where tests determined he was suffering from Ebola. A state operated laboratory in Texas also concluded that the specimens tested positive for Ebola. Frieden said testing for Ebola is "highly accurate". A spokeswoman for Dallas County health and human services department told the Guardian that it will be "conducting a public health follow up" on the patient which will include investigating travel history and recent contacts. Friedman said there was "zero risk" that the patient could have transmitted the disease on the flight from Liberia to the US, because he was not infectious at the time. Ebola can only be spread through direct contact through blood or bodily fluids, after the first appearance of symptoms. Doctors were discussing with the patient's family the possibility of treating the patient with experimental therapies, Frieden said. He acknowledged that other people who came into contact with the patient could develop the disease. "It is certainly possible that someone who had contact with this individual ... could develop Ebola in the coming weeks," Frieden said. Health officials in Texas attempted to reassure residents. Dr David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas department of state health services, told the CDC briefing "We have no other suspected cases in the state of Texas at this time." Zachary S Thompson, the Dallas county director of health and human services, said "Dallas County residents should be aware that the public health is our No1 priority. Our staff will continue to work hard to protect the health and welfare of the citizens in Dallas county." The Texas patient is the fifth to receive treatment for Ebola in the US. Aid workers Dr Kent Brantly of Texas and Nancy Writebol were the first Ebola patients to be treated in the US. Brantly and Writebol were treated in a bio containment unit at Emory University hospital in Atlanta. The recovered after receiving doses of an experimental drug which has since been depleted. Brantly recently testified before Congress, imploring the international community to step up its response to the outbreak. Dr Rick Sacra, the third US aid worker to contract Ebola while working at a hospital in Monrovia, was released from Nebraska medical center last week. Sacra had gone back to Monrovia after fellow missionaries Brantly and Writebol were diagnosed. In Monrovia, Sacra treated obstetrics patients. A fourth patient is being treated at Emory. The patient's identity has not being disclosed for confidentiality reasons, but he is believed to be a World Health Organization doctor who was treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone. A fifth American, a civil servant with dual American Liberian citizenship died in Monrovia in July. The Dallas mayor's office says the EMS crew members who transported the patient have been quarantined, just to be safe.
Washington, DC Readout of the President's Call with CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Dr. Tom Frieden updated the President this afternoon on the recently diagnosed Ebola case in Dallas, Texas. The President and Director Frieden discussed the stringent isolation protocols under which the patient is being treated as well as ongoing efforts to trace the patient's contacts to mitigate the risk of additional cases. Dr. Frieden noted that the CDC had been prepared for an Ebola case in the United States, and that we have the infrastructure in place to respond safely and effectively.
Dallas County Health and Human services said early Wednesday that no other suspected Ebola cases have been identified. Spokeswoman Erikka Neroes said investigators, who are interviewing people in contact with the confirmed case, have found no one else exhibiting symptoms. But investigators are still in the process of interviewing family members and others. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed Tuesday afternoon that a Dallas patient was the first person in the U.S. to be diagnosed with the Ebola virus. Federal, state and local officials immediately tried to dampen fears that the patient could trigger an outbreak of the deadly disease. Dr. Tom Frieden, the CDC director, vowed to "stop Ebola in its tracks" by identifying everyone who came into contact with the patient since he became contagious. Each of those people will be watched for signs of illness, including sudden fever, and if they develop them will be placed in isolation to prevent further spread of the disease. "This is a tried and true protocol. This is what we do," he said at a nationally broadcast media briefing in Atlanta. "There is no doubt in my mind that we will stop it here." The patient, who has not been identified, had traveled by plane from Liberia in West Africa and was visiting family in North Texas. He remains in isolation at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, undergoing treatment for symptoms of the dreaded virus. He was described Tuesday as being critically ill. Presbyterian announced late Monday that the patient could be an Ebola case, based on his recent travel and his symptoms. The patient's blood tested positive for the virus Tuesday morning in a state laboratory in Austin, said Dr. David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services. "We have no other suspicious cases in Texas at this time," he said. The CDC's laboratory in Atlanta confirmed the diagnosis later Tuesday and alerted the media at 3 32 p.m. Although the information was embargoed until 4 30 p.m., many news outlets released it immediately. The virus, named for the Ebola River in the Congo, has had a 90 percent fatality rate in Africa, although the rate for the current outbreak in West Africa is about 60 percent. More than 3,000 deaths have been linked to the disease. There is no vaccine or specific treatment for Ebola. Frieden said the Dallas patient arrived Sept. 20 in the U.S. He had no Ebola symptoms during the trip, which meant he was not contagious. On Sept. 24, he developed symptoms, and two days later he sought medical care at Presbyterian's emergency room. He was sent home but was admitted to the hospital on Sunday. He was placed in isolation and tested for Ebola. Zachary Thompson, director of Dallas County Health and Human Services, said his staff has begun tracing the patient's movements from the time he became ill until he was placed in isolation in the hospital. Every contact will be followed for up to 21 days, which is how long it can take for a person exposed to Ebola to begin showing symptoms. Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and body aches unrelated to any other disease. Frieden said the contact tracing effort would "cast a net widely." But so far, the people who might have been exposed include "a handful" of family members, whom the patient was visiting, and "a few community members," he said. The hospital workers who initially treated the patient also will be contacted. The two man Dallas Fire Rescue EMS crew that transported the patient to the hospital Sunday morning also will be monitored, in accordance with CDC and Dallas County health guidelines. The CDC director declined to reveal the patient's nationality, age or other identifying characteristics, such as where his relatives live in the Dallas area. Dr. Edward Goodman, an epidemiologist at Presbyterian, noted that U.S. patient privacy laws prohibit health care providers from identifying the patient further. Authorities did say, however, that the patient did not appear to have been caring for Ebola victims in Africa. How he became infected is not known. Although the virus is new to the U.S., hospitals have been preparing for its arrival, and the Presbyterian staff is well prepared to handle "this crisis," Goodman said. Frieden stressed that Ebola can only be spread through direct contact with an infected person's bodily fluids, including saliva, urine or blood. "Ebola is a scary disease," he conceded. "We're all hoping for the recovery of this individual." Meanwhile, the effort to stop its spread in Dallas County is just getting started. The CDC will send a crew of infectious disease experts to assist local agencies. Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings said an emergency operations center has been set up at City Hall, in case it's needed. "We've spoken to the county, state, and CDC's on the way," said Rawlings. "There's a clear protocol laid out, and everyone's making sure they are dotting every I and crossing every T." Staff writers Matthew Watkins and Robert Wilonsky contributed to this report. Friday The patient seeks care at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas either late Thursday night or early Friday morning. His symptoms were not specific enough to identify the virus and he was released. Sunday The patient is taken to Presbyterian Hospital by Dallas Fire Rescue ambulance. He is listed in critical condition in intensive care in isolation. Tuesday Positive test results at the Centers for Disease Control and the Texas State Department of Health Services are confirmed. Officials say that a "handful" of family members and two to three others had contact with the patient. Dallas activates its Emergency Operations Center to Level 2 high readiness to monitor the case and work with federal, state and county officials. The CDC has convened a team of epidemiologists and will take the lead in the Ebola investigation. Health care investigators will identify all people who had contact with the patient and monitor them for 21 days. Two Dallas Fire Rescue crew members who transported the patient are also being monitored. The CDC said it is possible that someone who came in contact with the patient could develop Ebola. Officials at the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta emphasized that the risk of anyone contracting the disease here is extremely small because it requires exposure to the bodily fluids of someone with the virus. CDC Director Tom Frieden said there is no danger in the United States of a widespread outbreak like the one in West Africa. "It is certainly possible that someone who has had contact with this patient could develop Ebola," he said. "But there is no doubt in my mind that we will stop it here." Because the man was not sick while on the plane or in the airport, health officials are not contacting fellow passengers. "There is zero risk of transmission on the flight," Frieden said. "He was checked for fever before getting on the flight." Officials at Texas Health Presbyterian said there is no danger for patients, workers or visitors because of rigorous infectious disease control practices.
The misdiagnosis meant the country's first confirmed sufferer was allowed to mix with the general population for 2 DAYS before he was put in isolation Doctors in America treating the first patient diagnosed with Ebola on US soil initially sent him home with just a course of antibiotics. It was not until two days later as his symptoms persisted he was finally admitted to the Dallas hospital and placed in isolation. Now, as the victim lies fighting for life in intensive care, bosses as the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital have launched an urgent investigation in to the handling of the case. Staff are still trying to identify all the people he came in to contact with in the six days before being taken in to hospital. They include his family and a 'few members of the local community'. Meanwhile experts were quick to dismiss concerns he could of infected other passengers while on the flight over from Liberia. Centres for Disease Control and Prevention director Dr Tom Frieden said "There is no doubt in my mind we will stop it here. We will control this importation, or this case of Ebola, so that it does not spread widely in this country. "There is zero risk of transmission on the flight." But the delay in admitting the man, who had travelled to the city from Liberia to visit family, allowed him to freely mix with other people for a full two days while showing symptoms of the virus. Medics have acknowledged the early onset of the virus in a human is when it is most contagious. News of the hospital's mistake was broken by a Scott Gordon, a reporter American's TV news station NBC 5 in Dallas Fort Worth. He tweeted "Hospital reviewing why patient wasn't properly diagnosed on Friday when he was evaluated and sent home. Dismissed with antibiotics." Hospital reviewing why patient wasn't properly diagnosed on Friday when he was evaluated and sent home. Dismissed with antibiotics ScottGordonNBC5 ( ScottGordonNBC5) September 30, 2014 The ambulance used to transport him has been quarantined while the three paramedics who tended to the patient are being monitored. They have been told to remain at home and will be closely assessed over the next three weeks the incubation period of Ebola, to see if they develop any symptoms. Dr Edward Goodman, an epidemiologist at the hospital, gave more details about the patient saying he was able to communicate and had been asking for food. "There is no risk to any person in the hospital," he said. Poll loading ... Medics said the victim, who arrived in Dallas on September 20, will not be given he experimental treatment ZMapp as there is none of it left. He is the first case diagnosed outside Africa in the current outbreak there, which has killed more than 3,000 people.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Dr. Thomas Frieden speaks at the CDC headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia Sept. 30, 2014. U.S. health officials said on Tuesday the first patient infected with the deadly Ebola virus had been diagnosed in the country after flying from Liberia to Texas, in a new sign of how the outbreak ravaging West Africa can spread globally. The patient sought treatment six days after arriving in Texas on Sept. 20, Frieden told reporters on Tuesday. He was admitted two days later to an isolation room at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas. Reuters Stop worrying about Ebola and get a flu shot instead. It is far more deadly in the U.S. compared with Ebola and is responsible for some of the worst disease outbreaks in the country's history. In the past year, there have been 9,632 hospitalizations related to influenza, according to the CDC. That's about 36 hospitalizations per 100,000 people in the U.S. Sixty percent of those cases were in people between the ages of 18 and 64. Health officials confirmed the first case of Ebola in the U.S. Tuesday, prompting panic over a possible outbreak of the virus. How many people have been exposed to the patient? How did the virus get here in the first place? And will it spread? Health experts, however, remain confident that Ebola, which already exists in the U.S. and for which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has tried and true steps to combat, will not be the deadly epidemic it has been in West Africa. The common flu, however, is something to worry about it. The proportion of flu related deaths during the 2013 2014 flu season hovered around 6 percent and remains below the epidemic threshold of 6.8 percent death rate. As of August 16, 2014, there were more than 105 flu related deaths in children over the past season. Previous seasons saw pediatric deaths range from 35 to over 170. Flu seasons are unpredictable and often differ in length and severity. However, influenza remains a leading cause of death in the U.S. The CDC estimates that between 1976 and 2007, influenza related deaths were as high as 49,000. And the virus is constantly changing, presenting health officials with new challenges every season. The CDC recommends a yearly flu vaccine to protect against the virus.
WASHINGTON. The President of the United States, Barak Obama, was updated both on the efforts that are being taken to try to "reduce the risk of additional cases" of Ebola after being informed yesterday of the first case of the disease diagnosed in the United States, indicated the White House and eight press communiqu . Obama spoke with Thomas Frieden, the director of the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) who revealed yesterday the news that a patient hospitalized in the Dallas Presbyterian Hospital (Texas) was diagnosed with Ebola. "The President and Director Frieden spoke of the strict protocols under which the patient is being treated, as well as the current efforts to trace the contacts of the patients in order to reduce the risk of additional cases," said the official note. In this conversation, Frieden pointed out also that they "the CDC is prepared for a case of Ebola in the US, and we have the infrastructures to respond in a safe and effective manner." Previously the director indicated during a press conference that apparently, the patient traveled from Liberia, one of the African countries most affected by the Ebola to Texas on 19 September "in order to visit relatives" who live in the United States and showed symptoms five days later, when he was hospitalized at Dallas Presbyterian. "The persons who travel on the airplane with this person were not at risk since he did not present symptoms until four days after arriving," indicated the CDC director. The patient is currently hospitalized in an isolation ward at the Dallas Presbyterian Hospital (Texas), after it was suspected that he had contracted the disease from the symptoms that he presented and his recent trip to Liberia. This is the first patient diagnosed with Ebola in the United States, although for more have been treated. Three of them have recovered completely, and the other was transferred to the Emory University Hospital more than two weeks ago, and as of now they do not know details of his condition. So far, the virus has caused the death of more than 3000 persons in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Nigeria, Guinea, and sending out, according to official numbers from the World Health Organization (WHO).
The first patient to be diagnosed with Ebola outside of Africa during the ongoing epidemic is being treated at a Dallas hospital. Federal and state health officials say the patient traveled from Liberia on Sept. 19. Here's what we know about him and the risk to Americans Where did he come from? The patient came from Liberia. He left Monrovia Sept. 19 and arrived in the United States Sept 20. Health officials won't give many details about the patient, but Centers for Disease Control and Prevention director Dr. Thomas Frieden says he was visiting relatives who live in the United States. That might imply he's not a U.S. citizen himself. Health officials also say he does not appear to have been a health worker, although they are double checking. The four Ebola patients evacuated to the U.S. for treatment have all been American doctors or medical missionaries. Can he have infected anybody else? Frieden says it's possible, although not very many people would be at risk. "It is certainly possible that someone who had contact with this individual ... could develop Ebola in the coming weeks. But there is no doubt in my mind that we will stop it here," Frieden said. PHOTO ESSAY Ebola continues its deadly march The man first felt sick Sept. 24 and went to the hospital in Dallas. But staff didn't suspect Ebola then, so he went home. He came back by ambulance on Sept. 28. He's now critically ill in isolation in the hospital's intensive care unit. Frieden has been clear that no one on the flight to the United States would have been at risk because the patient wasn't sick yet when he flew. The patient had been staying with family and not at a hotel, and in the affected countries in West Africa, family members, caregivers and health care workers who tend to patients have the highest risk of infection.
THE world's first known case of the Ebola virus to be diagnosed outside of Africa during the recent outbreak has been discovered in the US. An identified patient was admitted to the Texas Health Presbyterian hospital in Dallas on Sunday, September 28. According to sources, the patient travelled from Liberia in West Africa to the US on September 19 to visit family, and it was not until several days later that symptoms of the deadly virus began to present themselves. The American Centres for Disease Control (CDC) announced that the patient had been placed under strict quarantine, and was being treated in isolation. Thomas Frieden, director of the CDC, said "I have no doubt that we will control this case of Ebola so that it does not spread widely in this country." Since March's outbreak of the virus, Ebola has ravaged many countries in West Africa. Liberia, where this patient has come from, together with Sierra Leone and Guinea, are the three countries to have been most affected by the epidemic. Up to now, at least 3,000 people have been killed by the disease. Although Ebola sufferers have been treated in the US, the UK and in Spain over the last couple of months, this is the first time that the disease has been diagnosed outside of the African continent. Frieden said "This is the first patient diagnosed outside of Africa to our knowledge with this particular strain of Ebola." In a statement, the White House issued a statement saying "The president and director Frieden discussed the stringent isolation protocols under which the patient is being treated as well as ongoing efforts to trace the patient's contacts to mitigate the risk of additional cases." In the coming weeks, family members and those who have come into contact with the patient will be monitored for signs of the virus. There is also talk of the patient undergoing experimental Ebola treatment.
The first patient to be diagnosed with Ebola on US soil is in a serious condition, a hospital spokeswoman says. Officials at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas say the unidentified patient is being kept in isolation. The man is thought to have contracted the virus in Liberia before travelling to the US nearly two weeks ago. A spokesman for Liberia said the country had put in place "stringent screening" at the airport and the man showed no signs of fever or symptoms. "What this incident demonstrates is the clear international dimension of this Ebola crisis," Lewis Brown, the country's information minister, said in a statement. "For months, the Liberian government has been stressing that this disease is not simply a Liberian or West African problem." More than 3,000 people have already died of Ebola in West Africa and small number of US aid workers have recovered after being flown to the US. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says the Ebola virus seems to have been contained in Nigeria and Senegal, with no new cases reported there for almost a month. CDC Director Thomas Frieden confirmed the Ebola case on Tuesday, saying the unnamed patient left Liberia on 19 September and arrived in the US the next day to visit relatives, without displaying any symptoms of the virus. Symptoms became apparent in the patient on 24 September, and on 28 September he was admitted to a Texas hospital and put in isolation. The disease, which is not contagious until symptoms appear, is spread via close contact with bodily fluids. Aid workers who caught Ebola in West Africa have come back to the US for treatment but this is the first case of a patient developing the illness on US soil, says the BBC's Alastair Leithead in Los Angeles. The unnamed patient was described as critically ill on Tuesday, suggesting the hospital has upgraded his condition. Health officials are working to identify all people who came into contact with the unnamed patient while he was infectious, including family and a "couple" community members. Those people will then be monitored for 21 days to see if an Ebola related fever develops. But they will not be monitoring passengers on the man's flight, where Dr Frieden said there was "zero risk of transmission" as the man had been checked for fever before boarding. According to Dr Frieden, it is possible a family member who came in direct contact with the patient may develop Ebola in the coming weeks. But "the bottom line here is I have no doubt that we will control this importation, this case of Ebola, so it does not spread widely in this country," he added. "We will stop it here." On Wednesday, Zachary Thompson, the director of Dallas County Health and Human Services, told local broadcaster WFAA "there may be another case that is a close associate with this particular patient". In an interview with CNN, Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, suggested the hospital which initially saw the patient should have asked about international travel. "If the ER physician had asked for a travel history, and said , 'Do you have any recent travel outside of the country?' And if the person said, 'Well, I just came back from Liberia,' that would have been an enormous red flag for anybody, given the publicity that we have," Dr Fauci told the broadcaster. Ebola virus Busting the myths
At a press conference Tuesday afternoon, Tom Frieden, the director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), announced the first case of Ebola from the current epidemic that was diagnosed outside of Africa. The patient arrived in Dallas, Texas, on 20 September to visit relatives. Until today, the handful of people with Ebola in the United States were all diagnosed in Africa, carefully transported, and immediately provided with care in isolation units at hospitals. The new patient had his temperature taken before boarding the flight out of Liberia on 19 September, U.S. officials say, and had no disease symptoms at the time. He first started feeling ill on 24 September, sought medical care 2 days later, and was hospitalized on 28 September. Labs at CDC and the Texas Department of State Health Services both reported that his blood tested positive today for the Ebola strain circulating in West Africa. Two ScienceInsider reporters called in to the press conference, but there was so much interest from the media that they did not get a chance to ask a question. Here, however, are some of the questions they would like to have asked.
THE first case of deadly Ebola diagnosed in the U.S. has been confirmed in Dallas, in a man who traveled from Liberia and arrived in the U.S. on Sept. 20, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. The man is being kept in isolation in an intensive care unit. He had no symptoms when he left Liberia, then began to show signs of the disease on Sept. 24, the CDC said yesterday. He sought medical care on Sept. 26, was hospitalized two days later at Texas Health Presbyterian and is critically ill, said Thomas Frieden, director of the CDC. Frieden said the agency is working to identify anybody who had contact with the man and track them down. "There is no doubt in my mind that we will stop it here," he said at a press conference in Atlanta. The CDC has a team of epidemiologists on the way to Texas, he said. The team will follow anyone who has had contact with the man for 21 days. If they develop any symptoms, they'll immediately be isolated, and public health officials will trace their contacts. The diagnosis was first confirmed by a Texas lab based on samples of the man's blood and confirmed by the CDC. The man was traveling to the U.S. to visit family here and was staying with them. He was exposed to only a "handful" of people during the time when he had symptoms, including family members and possibly some community members, according to Frieden, who said there was little risk to anyone on a flight with the man. "Ebola doesn't spread before someone gets sick, and he didn't get sick until four days until after he got off the airplane," Frieden said. "So we don't believe there was any risk to anyone on the flight at that time." The patient wasn't involved in helping contain the Ebola outbreak effort, according to Frieden, who declined to give further details on the man's nationality or travels. CDC researchers said because Ebola is spread through human fluids, he had to have had close contact with someone in Liberia who had the disease or had recently died from it. After the patient sought medical care on Sept. 26 and was sent home with antibiotics, he returned in an ambulance to Texas Health Presbyterian two days later and was admitted, said Edward Goodman, an epidemiologist at the hospital. The ambulance workers and other health care professionals who treated him are being monitored for symptoms, Goodman said. A medical transport van moves past Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas where a... Read More The CDC and Texas doctors are discussing the use of possible experimental treatments, Frieden said, though no decision has been made. President Barack Obama was briefed about the patient by Frieden, the White House said in a statement. They discussed the patient's treatment and what was being done to trace the people the man might have contacted. U.S. authorities didn't disclose the flights or airlines the patient took from Liberia. No airlines serve Africa from Dallas Fort Worth International Airport, the main domestic and foreign gateway to North Texas, and none of the major U.S. carriers with overseas networks American Airlines Group Inc., United Continental Holdings Inc. and Delta Air Lines Inc. flies to Liberia. Delta dropped operations last month in Monrovia, the country's capital.
Dallas area residents learned during a noon news conference Wednesday that a man infected with Ebola had been in contact with as many as five Dallas ISD students and that he had been released from the hospital late last week despite telling hospital personnel that he was visiting from Liberia. During the press conference, the Associated Press reported that the patient was Thomas Eric Duncan, and that his sister, Mai Wureh, said he had told hospital personnel when he first went to the emergency room late Thursday or early Friday. Texas Gov. Rick Perry opened the news conference and was follwed by local officials including Dallas ISD Superintendent Mike Miles and Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins. Earlier Wednesday morning, hospital officials had announced that the patient's condition had been upgraded from critical to serious. Also on Wednesday, Dallas County Health and Human Services Director Zachary Thompson said that paramedics who transported the Duncan to a Dallas hospital on Sunday had tested negative for the virus. Despite the negative tests, the paramedics will be closely monitored for symptoms until the 21 day incubation period for the virus has passed. Thompson also said friends and family of the patient were still under close observation, but no additional cases had been idientified. "Given how sick this person could have been during the time frame, we would not be shocked" if there was a second case, Thompson said. "But do we have a confirmed case to date? No." Health department spokeswoman Erikka Neroes told The Dallas Morning News earlier in the morning that investigators interviewing people in contact with the patient have identfied no one else exhibiting symptoms. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed Tuesday afternoon that a Dallas patient was the first person in the U.S. to be diagnosed with the Ebola virus. Federal, state and local officials immediately tried to dampen fears that the patient could trigger an outbreak of the deadly disease. Dr. Tom Frieden, the CDC director, vowed to "stop Ebola in its tracks" by identifying everyone who came into contact with the patient since he became contagious. Each of those people will be watched for signs of illness, including sudden fever, and if they develop them will be placed in isolation to prevent further spread of the disease. "This is a tried and true protocol. This is what we do," he said at a nationally broadcast media briefing in Atlanta. "There is no doubt in my mind that we will stop it here." The patient, who has not been identified, had traveled by plane from Liberia in West Africa and was visiting family in North Texas. He remains in isolation at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, undergoing treatment for symptoms of the dreaded virus. He was described Tuesday as being critically ill. Presbyterian announced late Monday that the patient could be an Ebola case, based on his recent travel and his symptoms. The patient's blood tested positive for the virus Tuesday morning in a state laboratory in Austin, said Dr. David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services. "We have no other suspicious cases in Texas at this time," he said. The CDC's laboratory in Atlanta confirmed the diagnosis later Tuesday and alerted the media at 3 32 p.m. Although the information was embargoed until 4 30 p.m., many news outlets released it immediately. The virus, named for the Ebola River in the Congo, has had a 90 percent fatality rate in Africa, although the rate for the current outbreak in West Africa is about 60 percent. More than 3,000 deaths have been linked to the disease. There is no vaccine or specific treatment for Ebola. Frieden said the Dallas patient arrived Sept. 20 in the U.S. He had no Ebola symptoms during the trip, which meant he was not contagious. On Sept. 24, he developed symptoms, and two days later he sought medical care at Presbyterian's emergency room. He was sent home but was admitted to the hospital on Sunday. He was placed in isolation and tested for Ebola. Zachary Thompson, director of Dallas County Health and Human Services, said his staff has begun tracing the patient's movements from the time he became ill until he was placed in isolation in the hospital. Every contact will be followed for up to 21 days, which is how long it can take for a person exposed to Ebola to begin showing symptoms. Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and body aches unrelated to any other disease. Frieden said the contact tracing effort would "cast a net widely." But so far, the people who might have been exposed include "a handful" of family members, whom the patient was visiting, and "a few community members," he said. The hospital workers who initially treated the patient also will be contacted. The two man Dallas Fire Rescue EMS crew that transported the patient to the hospital Sunday morning also will be monitored, in accordance with CDC and Dallas County health guidelines. The CDC director declined to reveal the patient's nationality, age or other identifying characteristics, such as where his relatives live in the Dallas area. Dr. Edward Goodman, an epidemiologist at Presbyterian, noted that U.S. patient privacy laws prohibit health care providers from identifying the patient further. Authorities did say, however, that the patient did not appear to have been caring for Ebola victims in Africa. How he became infected is not known. Although the virus is new to the U.S., hospitals have been preparing for its arrival, and the Presbyterian staff is well prepared to handle "this crisis," Goodman said. Frieden stressed that Ebola can only be spread through direct contact with an infected person's bodily fluids, including saliva, urine or blood. "Ebola is a scary disease," he conceded. "We're all hoping for the recovery of this individual." Meanwhile, the effort to stop its spread in Dallas County is just getting started. The CDC will send a crew of infectious disease experts to assist local agencies. Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings said an emergency operations center has been set up at City Hall, in case it's needed. "We've spoken to the county, state, and CDC's on the way," said Rawlings. "There's a clear protocol laid out, and everyone's making sure they are dotting every I and crossing every T." Staff writers Matthew Watkins and Robert Wilonsky contributed to this report. Friday The patient seeks care at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas either late Thursday night or early Friday morning. His symptoms were not specific enough to identify the virus and he was released. Sunday The patient is taken to Presbyterian Hospital by Dallas Fire Rescue ambulance. He is listed in critical condition in intensive care in isolation. Tuesday Positive test results at the Centers for Disease Control and the Texas State Department of Health Services are confirmed. Officials say that a "handful" of family members and two to three others had contact with the patient. Dallas activates its Emergency Operations Center to Level 2 high readiness to monitor the case and work with federal, state and county officials. The CDC has convened a team of epidemiologists and will take the lead in the Ebola investigation. Health care investigators will identify all people who had contact with the patient and monitor them for 21 days. Two Dallas Fire Rescue crew members who transported the patient are also being monitored. The CDC said it is possible that someone who came in contact with the patient could develop Ebola. Officials at the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta emphasized that the risk of anyone contracting the disease here is extremely small because it requires exposure to the bodily fluids of someone with the virus. CDC Director Tom Frieden said there is no danger in the United States of a widespread outbreak like the one in West Africa. "It is certainly possible that someone who has had contact with this patient could develop Ebola," he said. "But there is no doubt in my mind that we will stop it here." Because the man was not sick while on the plane or in the airport, health officials are not contacting fellow passengers. "There is zero risk of transmission on the flight," Frieden said. "He was checked for fever before getting on the flight." Officials at Texas Health Presbyterian said there is no danger for patients, workers or visitors because of rigorous infectious disease control practices.
Washington. The United States has diagnosed its first case of Ebola in a man who was infected in Liberia and traveled to Texas, US health officials said Tuesday, pledging to contain the virus that has killed more than 3,000. The man is also the first to be diagnosed outside Africa, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said, cautioning that since he was not sick on the plane he was unlikely to have infected other travelers. CDC chief Tom Frieden vowed that US health authorities would be able to contain the virus and the White House said, quoted by AFP, President Barack Obama had been briefed by the CDC about the Texas case.
A man thought to have contracted the deadly Ebola virus in Liberia before travelling to the US has been transfered to an isolation unit at a Texas hospital. The patient arrived in the country without displaying any symptoms but later became ill. He is the first person to have been diagnosed with the virus on US soil. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) Director, Dr. Thomas Frieden issued a statement of reassurance to the American public "I have no doubt that we will control this importation, this case of Ebola so it does not spread widely in this country. It is certainly possible that someone who had contact with this individual a family member or other individual could develop Ebola in the coming weeks. But there is no doubt in my mind that we will stop it here" According to the The World Health Organisation more than 3,000 people have died of the virus so far, mostly in Liberia. The outbreak has spread across several West Africa Nations which are now receiving international help. WHO says a potential vaccine against Ebola might be ready for limited distribution in January next year.
U.S. health officials have warned for months that someone infected with Ebola could unknowingly carry the virus to this country, and there is word now that it has happened A traveler in a Dallas hospital became the first patient diagnosed in the U.S. Texas health officials said there were no other suspected cases in the state, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention immediately sought to calm fears that one case would spread widely. "Ebola can be scary. But there's all the difference in the world between the U.S. and parts of Africa where Ebola is spreading," CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said, stressing that U.S. health workers know how to control the virus. "There is no doubt in my mind that we will stop it here," he told a news conference in Atlanta on Tuesday.
A man who flew from Liberia to Texas has become the first patient infected with the deadly ebola virus to be diagnosed in the United States, health officials said, a sign the outbreak ravaging West Africa may spread globally. The patient sought treatment six days after arriving in Texas on September 20, Dr Thomas Frieden, director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), told reporters. He was admitted two days later to an isolation room at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas. US health officials and lawmakers have been bracing for the eventuality that a patient would arrive on US shores undetected, testing the preparedness of the nation's healthcare system. Frieden and other health authorities said they were taking every step possible to ensure the virus did not spread widely. "It is certainly possible someone who had contact with this individual could develop ebola in the coming weeks," Frieden told a news conference. "I have no doubt we will stop this in its tracks in the United States." Frieden said a handful of people, mostly family members, may have been exposed to the patient after he fell ill and that health authorities were tracking down anyone who might have had contact with the man. The emergency responders who transported him to the hospital have been quarantined, according to a statement from Dallas city officials. He said there was likely no threat to any airline passengers because the patient had no symptoms during his flight. Asked whether the patient was a US citizen, Frieden described the person as a visitor to family in the country. At least 3,091 people have died from ebola in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea in West Africa. The CDC has warned the number of infections could rise to as many as 1.4m by early next year without a massive global intervention.
On Tuesday, Spanish health authorities confirmed that a total of four people had been hospitalized in a bid to curb the spread of Ebola. The first case of Ebola to be contracted outside West Africa was announced by Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato at a press conference on Monday. The 40 year old nurse was transferred early on Tuesday to Madrid's Carlos III hospital, where she had helped treat two elderly Spanish missionaries who died of Ebola shortly after being brought home from Liberia and Sierra Leone. A further three people have now been hospitalized, including the nurse's husband, a health worker and a Spaniard who traveled from Nigeria. A total of 30 people who came into contact with the nurse are currently being monitored for symptoms. Amid growing fears that Ebola could spread, Zsuzsanna Jakab, the Europe director of the World Health Organization, told the Reuters news agency on Tuesday that "it is quite unavoidable ... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around." "The most important thing in our view is that Europe is still at low risk and that the western part of the European region particularly is the best prepared in the world to respond to viral hemorrhagic fevers including Ebola," Jakab added. Lessons to learn Following Mato's confirmation of the first Ebola case to be contracted outside West Africa, the European Commission, contacted Spain's health minister on Monday "to obtain some clarification" of how the nurse contracted Ebola, despite all the precautions taken. "There is obviously a problem somewhere," Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said. Despite the case in Spain, commissioners believe that the chance of a European Ebola epidemic "remains highly unlikely," Vincent said, but hope that Spain's experience "may even in some way serve as a lesson for other member states." According to the World Health Organization, more than 3,400 people have died from the hemorrhagic fever since the outbreak began in West Africa in March. Ebola is transmitted by direct contact with the blood, body fluids and tissues of infected animals or people.
Four more potential cases of Ebola were under observation Tuesday in Spain, health authorities said Tuesday, a day after a nurse's assistant became the first person known to have contracted the deadly virus outside Africa in the current outbreak. The woman helped treat two Spanish missionaries, both of whom had contracted Ebola in West Africa, one in Liberia and the other in Sierra Leone. Both died after returning to Spain. The developments come just as the organization Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) reports that a Norwegian staff member has contracted the deadly virus. The staffer had been working in the Sierra Leone city of Bo and was placed in isolation Sunday after developing a fever, the organization said. The worker is being sent to a treatment center in Europe. In Spain, no details have yet been given of exactly how the nurse's assistant contracted the virus, and her condition is unknown. Francisco Arnalis, head of internal medicine at the Carlos III Hospital, told a news conference that the three other potential Ebola cases are being monitored there. A hospital spokeswoman said later Tuesday that another nurse's assistant who is on the same team as the infected nurse's assistant is under observation. This more recent case was admitted to the hospital after she "started having a little bit of a temperature," said the spokeswoman, who wasn't named as is customary in Spain. Earlier, health officials explained that one of the people being monitored is the original nurse's assistant's husband, who faces a high risk of infection and had no protection. Another is a suspected case in a man who traveled overseas and has tested negative twice. The fourth, a nurse, is not a suspected case but has been brought in as a precaution after suffering diarrhea. She was exposed, but she was wearing protective gear, Arnalis said. Thirty people from Carlos III Hospital and 22 others from Alcorcon hospital plus family members are being monitored, according to authorities. It was not immediately known whether the nurse's assistant hospitalized late Tuesday was one of these 30 contacts at Carlos III Hospital. The hospital will not release information about the status of the nurse's assistant, who has not been named, in order to respect her privacy, director Rafael Santamaria said. The hospital has two potential treatments at its disposal, said Dr. Jose Ramon Arribas, one using an IV drip with the antibodies of Ebola survivors and the other an antiviral drug. "This is a treatment that the WHO (World Health Organization) has recommended, even though they haven't verified its efficacy," he said of the IV drip. EU We need to know what happened Spanish authorities have said that all the proper protocols and procedures were followed in the care of the two missionaries. But the European Union has asked for an explanation as to how the woman was infected. European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said on Tuesday that "Spain told us all the protocols have been followed, but obviously something wrong happened." There have been 10 evacuations of Ebola infected patients from Africa to Europe, eight of those within the European Union, Vincent said and it is first time that something like this has happened. "The hospitals where the patients are being taken are supposed to be equipped and ready to deal with Ebola patients," he said. "If protocols are being followed, it's highly unlikely that an outbreak could happen in the EU. But again, zero risk doesn't exist, particularly in a hospital, where staff deal with sick people. "We need to find out as soon as possible what happened and if we need to revise procedures." There will be an extra meeting of European officials to discuss the Spanish Ebola case on Wednesday, he said. The World Health Organization said it was "ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required," as it investigates the case and traces the infected woman's contacts. In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron will lead a Cabinet meeting to discuss way to coordinate how to handle response to Ebola there, if it's necessary. Cameron called Sierra Leone President Ernest Bai Koroma to discuss the status of the outbreak in the West African nation and talk about how aid the UK has provided is helping. According to Downing Street, the Sierra Leone leader said the situation continues to be "very serious" and there was a need to train more medical staff, improve burial processes and develop a better system for running service treatment centers.
Nurse helped treat missionary, priest who died after contracting Ebola Photos Spanish health authorities said Tuesday they are monitoring three more potential cases of Ebola, a day after a nurse's assistant became the first person known to have contracted Ebola outside Africa in the current outbreak. The woman helped treat two Spanish missionaries, both of whom had contracted Ebola in West Africa, one in Liberia and the other in Sierra Leone. Both died after returning to Spain. The developments come just as the organization Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) reports that a Norwegian staff member has contracted the deadly virus. The staffer had been working in the Sierra Leone city of Bo and was placed in isolation Sunday after developing a fever, the organization said. The worker is being sent to a treatment center in Europe. In Spain, no details have yet been given of exactly how the nurse's assistant contracted the virus, and her condition is unknown. Francisco Arnalis, head of internal medicine at the Carlos III Hospital, told a news conference that the three other potential Ebola cases are being monitored there. One is the assistant's husband, who faces a high risk of infection and had no protection. Another is a suspected case in a man who traveled overseas and has tested negative twice, health officials said. The third, a nurse, is not a suspected case but has been brought in as a precaution after suffering diarrhea. She was exposed, but she was wearing protective gear, Arnalis said. Another 22 contacts with the nurse's assistant outside the Carlos III Hospital are also being monitored, the head of the hospital said. The hospital will not release information about the status of the nurse's assistant, who has not been named, in order to respect her privacy, director Rafael Santamaria said. The hospital has two potential treatments at its disposal, said Dr. Jose Ramon Arribas, one using an IV drip with the antibodies of Ebola survivors and the other an antiviral drug. "This is a treatment that the WHO (World Health Organization) has recommended, even though they haven't verified its efficacy," he said of the IV drip. EU We need to know what happened Spanish authorities have said that all the proper protocols and procedures were followed in the care of the two missionaries. But the European Union has asked for an explanation as to how the woman was infected. European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said on Tuesday that "Spain told us all the protocols have been followed, but obviously something wrong happened." There have been 10 evacuations of Ebola infected patients from Africa to Europe, eight of those within the European Union, Vincent said and it is first time that something like this has happened. "The hospitals where the patients are being taken are supposed to be equipped and ready to deal with Ebola patients," he said. "If protocols are being followed, it's highly unlikely that an outbreak could happen in the EU. But again, zero risk doesn't exist, particularly in a hospital, where staff deal with sick people. "We need to find out as soon as possible what happened and if we need to revise procedures." There will be an extra meeting of European officials to discuss the Spanish Ebola case on Wednesday, he said. The World Health Organization said it was "ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required," as it investigates the case and traces the infected woman's contacts. In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron will lead a Cabinet meeting to discuss way to coordinate how to handle response to Ebola there, if it's necessary. Cameron called Sierra Leone President Ernest Bai Koroma to discuss the status of the outbreak in the West African nation and talk about how aid the UK has provided is helping. According to Downing Street, the Sierra Leone leader said the situation continues to be "very serious" and there was a need to train more medical staff, improve burial processes and develop a better system for running service treatment centers. Unions question equipment used Some Spanish unions have blamed the government, saying they warned it that the personal protective equipment used by the medical team was not of the highest standard. Angry doctors and nurses outside the Carlos III Hospital where the nurse's assistant is being treated and where the two missionaries were cared for before her said they were outraged the pair had been brought to the hospital, one in August and the other in September. They said that the two priests, Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia Viejo, were almost dead when they arrived, and that they should not have been brought back to Spain, thereby putting other people's lives at risk. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato announced Monday that testing had confirmed the nurse's assistant has the virus. The husband of the nurse's assistant, who is under observation, is not sick, a spokesman for the Health Ministry said. It was not clear whether he is under quarantine. The couple have no children. The assistant was one of about 30 health professionals in Spain who helped treat the Ebola patients. They and the ambulance team that took her to the hospital are now reportedly under observation. No word on where she took her vacation Health officials said the assistant developed symptoms on September 30. She was not hospitalized until this week, when her only symptom was a fever. She was first taken to a hospital in southern Madrid before being transferred to Carlos III Hospital, where she had helped care for the Ebola patients. The second of the missionaries died on September 26, and she went on vacation a day later, health officials said. They have not said where that vacation was taken. A few days later, she reported that she was not feeling well but her temperatures were not very high, officials said. It was only several days later that her temperature soared and she was hospitalized. An investigation is underway to find everyone the assistant may have had contact with while infectious. So far, there are no other known related cases. Health authorities have urged people to stay calm, as they hope that the virus' spread is contained. "We are working in coordination to give the best care to the patient and to guarantee the safety of all citizens," said Mato, the health minister. Obama National security priority The news came amid growing fears in the United States that the disease could spread. The first person to be diagnosed in the United States with Ebola, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical but stable condition in Texas, according to Candace White, a spokeswoman for Texas Health. He is on a ventilator and receiving kidney dialysis, she said, adding that his liver function, which declined over the weekend, has improved. He is continuing to receive an investigational medication, White said. During a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention press conference on Monday, CNN asked Texas Department of State Health Services Dr. David Lakey how care protocols in Spain compared to those involving Duncan in Texas. Lakey said he personally went to the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital ward in Dallas where the patient is being treated, and saw that there was extensive security and a detailed method of how providers were protecting themselves. "They take this really seriously," he said, describing treatment protocol as "meticulous." CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said none of the people who Duncan came into contact with before his diagnosis that the CDC has identified for monitoring has shown symptoms. Frieden also said the agency has not made final decisions about possible ways to screen at airports in the United States. Meanwhile, some of the U.S. military personnel being deployed to Liberia to help tackle the Ebola crisis may come into contact with the virus, a Pentagon official said Tuesday. The head of U.S. Africa Command, Gen. David Rodriguez, said that while the majority of U.S. troops involved in the mission would not be exposed to the disease, those in mobile testing labs could have contact in that environment. "They're all trained at a very, very high level," Rodriguez told reporters of the lab personnel, who constitute a "separate, specialty element of the force." President Obama told reporters Monday, "As I've said from the start of this outbreak, I consider this a top national security priority. This is not just a matter of charity. ... This is an issue about our safety." Obama called for protocols to help stop the spread of the disease, including additional air passenger screening, while downplaying the risk of an epidemic in the United States. Ebola has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, with more than 7,400 suspected, probable and confirmed cases. The virus is transmitted through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, feces and vomit. The incubation period, from the time of infection to symptoms, is two to 21 days. Recommended
Spanish officials are investigating how a nurse in Madrid contracted the Ebola virus, becoming the first person known to catch the virus outside West Africa, the flashpoint of the current outbreak. Health officials said the woman helped to treat two Spanish missionary priests who died last month after being flown back from Liberia and Sierra Leone. But they said all proper safety procedures were followed in the care of the missionaries. The woman was hospitalized Sunday with a fever and is reported to be in stable condition. Health officials said her husband and another health care worker who treated the missionaries have been quarantined, as well as a man who recently arrived in Spain from Nigeria. Officials said they were monitoring about 30 other people who came into contact with the nurse for Ebola symptoms. Meanwhile, an American journalist diagnosed in Liberia with the Ebola virus is being treated at a hospital in the western state of Nebraska. Ashoka Mukpo arrived Monday on a specially equipped plane and placed in an isolation unit at the University of Nebraska Medical Center. Mukpo, who was on assignment in Liberia for NBC News, is the fifth person in the United States to be diagnosed with Ebola. In Washington Monday, U.S. President Barack Obama said the chances for an Ebola outbreak in the United States are 'extremely low,' but also said his administration is considering new measures to prevent the spread of the Ebola virus in the U.S. The president said officials are working on additional screening protocols for international airline passengers both in West Africa and the United States. Thomas Eric Duncan, a Liberian man who became the first confirmed case of Ebola on American soil, is in critical condition at a hospital in Dallas, Texas Ebola has taken about 3,500 lives in West Africa since the outbreak began last year. Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone are the hardest hit countries.
The Spanish nurse who became the first outside of Africa to become infected with Ebola has been named along with her husband. Teresa Romero Ramos and Javier Limon Romero are being held in quarantine in separate rooms at the same hospital in the Spanish capital. Ms Romero Ramos, 44, from Galicia in northwest Spain, who is one of the medical team that treated two repatriated Spanish priests who died from Ebola, was diagnosed with the killer disease yesterday. Their identities came out after Mr Romero asked a Spanish animal charity to start a social media campaign to stop health officials putting his dog down. Scroll down for video Her husband, who lives in the Madrid suburb of Alcorcon, raged 'I want to publicly denounce a man called Zarco, who I think is Head of Health for the community of Madrid and who's told me that I have to sacrifice my dog. He's asked for my consent and I've denied it, to which he responded that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and sacrifice it.' Anger was growing in Spain meanwhile over how the nurse became infected with Ebola as it was claimed the protective suits given to health officials were not good enough. Four suspected Ebola patients are now in hospital in Madrid after Teresa Romero Ramos was confirmed as the first person to catch the virus outside of West Africa. The escalation in Spain's Ebola outbreak comes as officials revealed 30 people were being monitored for symptoms. In a further worrying development, the World Health Organisation says Europe must brace itself for even more outbreaks. It has also since emerged that a week before she tested positive for Ebola the nurse had contacted health workers to complain of a fever and fatigue, telling them she had helped treat two priests who contracted Ebola in Africa and were repatriated to Spain. But it wasn't until she went to her local hospital on Monday that she was finally admitted and tested for the virus. It is not the same hospital where she worked, raising questions over the number of people she has come into contact with. Today husband Javier, who is also being looked after at the Carlos III Hospital, spoke to respected Spanish daily El Mundo, which managed to get a quick phone interview with him in hospital. He sounded fit and in good health during their five minute chat. He told the paper 'My wife has been working normally and has followed all the normal protocols. 'We've no idea how she could have been infected. 'She's never appeared worried about anything. We were going to go on holiday and couldn't because of an accident I had at work. 'She volunteered to help the second priest who died from Ebola. She was on the rota when the first patient arrived but volunteered second time round.' Anger was growing in Spain today over how the nurse became infected with Ebola as it was claimed the protective suits given to health officials were not good enough. Four suspected Ebola patients are now in hospital in Madrid after Teresa Romero Ramos was confirmed as the first person to catch the virus outside of West Africa. The escalation in Spain's Ebola outbreak comes as officials revealed 30 people were being monitored for symptoms, It has also since emerged that a week before she tested positive for Ebola she had contacted health workers to complain of a fever and fatigue, telling them she had helped treat two priests who contracted Ebola in Africa and were repatriated to Spain. But it wasn't until she went to her local hospital on Monday that she was finally admitted and tested for the virus. It is not the same hospital where she worked, raising questions over the number of people she has come into contact with. Meanwhile the World Health Organisation warned that it is 'unavoidable' more cases will be diagnosed in Europe. WHO's European director Zsuzsanna Jakab said further such events were 'unavoidable'. She said 'Such imported cases and similar events as have happened in Spain will happen also in the future, most likely. 'It is quite unavoidable... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around.' 'It will happen,' she added. 'But the most important thing in our view is that Europe is still at low risk and that the western part of the European region particularly is the best prepared in the world to respond to viral hemorrhagic fevers including Ebola.' Officials have said they 'don't know' how the Spanish nurse became infected with the deadly virus. But last night staff at the Carlos III hospital where she worked claimed the protective suits they were given were not good enough. Unnamed sources told Spanish daily El Pais the suits did not meet World Health Organisation standards. They said the suits they were issued with were permeable and lacked breathing apparatus. 'At the moment we are investigating the way in which the professional was infected,' said Antonio Alemany, the head of Madrid's primary health care services. 'We don't know yet what failed,' he was quoted by the Guardian as saying. 'We're investigating the mechanism of infection.' Mercedes Vinuesa, the head of Spain's public health service, told parliament today that the nurse's husband had been placed in quarantine. Although he has shown no signs of Ebola, the measures have been taken as a precaution. In addition, a second nurse who also treated the priest who died on September 25 was put into quarantine after experiencing diarrhoea but she did not have a fever, the most common initial symptom for Ebola. A Nigerian man who recently arrived in Spain is also under quarantine but tested negative for Ebola in his first test. News of the quarantines has hit Spain's stock market. It is one of Europe's biggest tourist destinations and stocks in companies such as airlines and hotel chains fell on the Madrid stock exchange. Prof Jonathan Ball, Professor of Molecular Virology at the University of Nottingham, said 'If appropriate containment measures were adopted this really should not have happened. 'It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again. 'As the African outbreak perfectly illustrates, healthcare workers put their life on the line, so everything should be done to ensure that risks are minimised as much as possible. 'As for the suggestion of screening people as they arrive at airports, this would only work if people were already showing symptoms.' Dr Ben Neuman, Lecturer in Virology, University of Reading, said 'Nurses face a problem in that a person who is sick with Ebola can make quite a lot of highly infectious waste, as the patient loses fluid through diarrhoea and vomiting. 'Those bodily fluids can contain millions of Ebola viruses, and it only takes one to transfer the infection. 'The protective suits that Ebola workers wear provide excellent protection, but there is a danger when it is time to take the suit off. 'It is also possible that a tiny amount of Ebola containing liquid splashed on the protective garments, and then was transferred to her skin while removing the protective clothing.' Two separate tests confirmed that the woman had contracted the disease. Despite the concerns raised today, colleagues last night expressed their surprise at news the nurse had contracted the virus, saying that there had been 'extreme' measures in place to protect hospital staff. One told Spanish daily El Pais that nurses were equipped with two protective overalls, two pairs of gloves and glasses. All medics had to use a special card to access the hospital's sixth floor where the two men were treated. The Carlos III Hospital was evacuated before the arrival of the first missionary, Miguel Pajares, who contracted the disease in Liberia, but not for Mr Viejo as the sixth floor had already been hermetically sealed. Mr Pajares, the first person in Europe to be treated for Ebola, died at Madrid's Carlos III Hospital in August despite receiving experimental drug ZMapp after he returned. Mr Viejo died at the hospital the following month after contracting the virus in Sierra Leone. The Spanish nurse is understood to have tested positive for Ebola in a first analysis after going to hospital in Alcorcon near Madrid with a high fever early yesterday morning. Doctors isolated the emergency treatment room. A Ministry of Health source told Spanish daily El Mundo 'She arrived at the University Hospital Alcorcon Foundation with fever and has undergone tests. The first test has come back positive.' Meanwhile, in Oslo medical teams received their country's first Ebola victim after a Doctors Without Borders worker flew home after testing positive for the virus. Anne Cecilie Kaltenborn, the organization's general secretary in Norway, said the Norwegian female doctor started feeling sick over the weekend and was isolated after she came down with a fever on Sunday. 'We don't know how she was infected. We have very strict rules about working in the field, and all our workers use protective clothing,' Ms Kaltenborn told reporters in Oslo. 'She will be placed in an isolation ward in hospital in Oslo after arrival.' Ms Kaltenborn declined to name the worker or give further details pending an investigation by the organization. She said Doctors Without Borders has 86 foreign workers among the 1,200 working currently in Sierra Leone. Health Minister Bent Hoie said Norway is ready to accept the patient and that health officials had been preparing for months to treat people infected with the virus. Ebola spreads through contact with the bodily fluids of someone who has the virus and the only way to stop an outbreak is to isolate those who are infected. The current outbreak in west Africa, the worst ever, has infected nearly 7,500 people and caused more than 3,400 deaths. There have been a handful of cases in the West. British nurse William Pooley, 29, who was infected with the virus while working in Sierra Leone, recovered last month after being flown back to London for treatment. He later jetted to the US to give blood to an American battling the disease. Today in the U.S., video journalist Ashoka Mukpo, who became infected while working in Liberia, arrived at the Nebraska Medical Centre in Omaha. It's not clear how he was infected said his father, Dr. Mitchell Levy, adding that on Monday, his symptoms of fever and nausea still appeared mild. Mr Mukpo is the fifth American sick with Ebola brought back from West Africa for medical care. The others were aid workers three have recovered and one remains hospitalised. There are no approved drugs for Ebola, so doctors have tried experimental treatments in some cases. A critically ill Liberian man hospitalised in Dallas is getting an experimental treatment, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said. Thomas Eric Duncan is the first person to be diagnosed with Ebola in the U.S., he was admitted to the hospital on September 28. The hospital said Mr Duncan was receiving an experimental medication called brincidofovir, which was developed to treat other types of viruses. Laboratory tests suggested it may also work against Ebola. Texas Governor Rick Perry urged the U.S. government to begin screening air passengers arriving from Ebola affected nations, including taking their temperatures. But Federal health officials say a travel ban could make the desperate situation worse in those countries. White House spokesman Josh Earnest said it was not currently under consideration. President Barack Obama said the U.S. will be 'working on protocols to do additional passenger screening both at the source and here in the United States.' He did not outline any details. Leading charity Save the Children warned recently Ebola is spreading at a 'terrifying rate' with the number of recorded cases doubling every week. Speaking at a conference in London co hosted with Sierra Leone last week, UK Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond called for more financial aid, doctors and nurses. Scientists have warned that the deadly virus could spread across the world infecting people from the U.S. to China within three weeks. There is a 50 per cent chance a traveller carrying the disease could touch down in the UK by October 24, a team of U.S. researchers have predicted. Using Ebola spread patterns and airline traffic data they have calculated the odds of the virus spreading across the world. They estimate there is a 75 per cent chance Ebola will reach French shores by October 24. And Belgium has a 40 per cent chance of seeing the disease arrive on its territory, while Spain and Switzerland have lower risks of 14 per cent each. Professor Alessandro Vespignani of Northeastern University in Boston, who led the research, said 'This is not a deterministic list, it's about probabilities but those probabilities are growing for everyone. 'It's just a matter of who gets lucky and who gets unlucky. 'Air traffic is the driver.
Another nurse's assistant in Spain is under observation on suspicion of being infected with the Ebola virus, a spokeswoman at Madrid's Carlos III Hospital said. This person is on the same team as the nurse's assistant who became the first person known to have contracted Ebola outside Africa in the current outbreak. Original story published at 4 09 p.m. ET Spanish health authorities said Tuesday they are monitoring three more potential cases of Ebola, a day after a nurse's assistant became the first person known to have contracted Ebola outside Africa in the current outbreak. The woman helped treat two Spanish missionaries, both of whom had contracted Ebola in West Africa, one in Liberia and the other in Sierra Leone. Both died after returning to Spain. The developments come just as the organization Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) reports that a Norwegian staff member has contracted the deadly virus. The staffer had been working in the Sierra Leone city of Bo and was placed in isolation Sunday after developing a fever, the organization said. The worker is being sent to a treatment center in Europe. In Spain, no details have yet been given of exactly how the nurse's assistant contracted the virus, and her condition is unknown. Francisco Arnalis, head of internal medicine at the Carlos III Hospital, told a news conference that the three other potential Ebola cases are being monitored there. One is the assistant's husband, who faces a high risk of infection and had no protection. Another is a suspected case in a man who traveled overseas and has tested negative twice, health officials said. The third, a nurse, is not a suspected case but has been brought in as a precaution after suffering diarrhea. She was exposed, but she was wearing protective gear, Arnalis said. Another 22 contacts with the nurse's assistant outside the Carlos III Hospital are also being monitored, the head of the hospital said. The hospital will not release information about the status of the nurse's assistant, who has not been named, in order to respect her privacy, director Rafael Santamaria said. The hospital has two potential treatments at its disposal, said Dr. Jose Ramon Arribas, one using an IV drip with the antibodies of Ebola survivors and the other an antiviral drug. "This is a treatment that the WHO (World Health Organization) has recommended, even though they haven't verified its efficacy," he said of the IV drip. EU We need to know what happened Spanish authorities have said that all the proper protocols and procedures were followed in the care of the two missionaries. But the European Union has asked for an explanation as to how the woman was infected. European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said on Tuesday that "Spain told us all the protocols have been followed, but obviously something wrong happened." There have been 10 evacuations of Ebola infected patients from Africa to Europe, eight of those within the European Union, Vincent said and it is first time that something like this has happened. "The hospitals where the patients are being taken are supposed to be equipped and ready to deal with Ebola patients," he said. "If protocols are being followed, it's highly unlikely that an outbreak could happen in the EU. But again, zero risk doesn't exist, particularly in a hospital, where staff deal with sick people. "We need to find out as soon as possible what happened and if we need to revise procedures." There will be an extra meeting of European officials to discuss the Spanish Ebola case on Wednesday, he said. The World Health Organization said it was "ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required," as it investigates the case and traces the infected woman's contacts. In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron will lead a Cabinet meeting to discuss way to coordinate how to handle response to Ebola there, if it's necessary. Cameron called Sierra Leone President Ernest Bai Koroma to discuss the status of the outbreak in the West African nation and talk about how aid the UK has provided is helping. According to Downing Street, the Sierra Leone leader said the situation continues to be "very serious" and there was a need to train more medical staff, improve burial processes and develop a better system for running service treatment centers. Unions question equipment used Some Spanish unions have blamed the government, saying they warned it that the personal protective equipment used by the medical team was not of the highest standard. Angry doctors and nurses outside the Carlos III Hospital where the nurse's assistant is being treated and where the two missionaries were cared for before her said they were outraged the pair had been brought to the hospital, one in August and the other in September. They said that the two priests, Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia Viejo, were almost dead when they arrived, and that they should not have been brought back to Spain, thereby putting other people's lives at risk. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato announced Monday that testing had confirmed the nurse's assistant has the virus. The husband of the nurse's assistant, who is under observation, is not sick, a spokesman for the Health Ministry said. It was not clear whether he is under quarantine. The couple have no children. The assistant was one of about 30 health professionals in Spain who helped treat the Ebola patients. They and the ambulance team that took her to the hospital are now reportedly under observation. No word on where she took her vacation Health officials said the assistant developed symptoms on September 30. She was not hospitalized until this week, when her only symptom was a fever. She was first taken to a hospital in southern Madrid before being transferred to Carlos III Hospital, where she had helped care for the Ebola patients. The second of the missionaries died on September 26, and she went on vacation a day later, health officials said. They have not said where that vacation was taken. A few days later, she reported that she was not feeling well but her temperatures were not very high, officials said. It was only several days later that her temperature soared and she was hospitalized. An investigation is underway to find everyone the assistant may have had contact with while infectious. So far, there are no other known related cases. Health authorities have urged people to stay calm, as they hope that the virus' spread is contained. "We are working in coordination to give the best care to the patient and to guarantee the safety of all citizens," said Mato, the health minister. Obama National security priority The news came amid growing fears in the United States that the disease could spread. The first person to be diagnosed in the United States with Ebola, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical but stable condition in Texas, according to Candace White, a spokeswoman for Texas Health. He is on a ventilator and receiving kidney dialysis, she said, adding that his liver function, which declined over the weekend, has improved. He is continuing to receive an investigational medication, White said. During a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention press conference on Monday, CNN asked Texas Department of State Health Services Dr. David Lakey how care protocols in Spain compared to those involving Duncan in Texas. Lakey said he personally went to the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital ward in Dallas where the patient is being treated, and saw that there was extensive security and a detailed method of how providers were protecting themselves. "They take this really seriously," he said, describing treatment protocol as "meticulous." CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said none of the people who Duncan came into contact with before his diagnosis that the CDC has identified for monitoring has shown symptoms. Frieden also said the agency has not made final decisions about possible ways to screen at airports in the United States. Meanwhile, some of the U.S. military personnel being deployed to Liberia to help tackle the Ebola crisis may come into contact with the virus, a Pentagon official said Tuesday. The head of U.S. Africa Command, Gen. David Rodriguez, said that while the majority of U.S. troops involved in the mission would not be exposed to the disease, those in mobile testing labs could have contact in that environment. "They're all trained at a very, very high level," Rodriguez told reporters of the lab personnel, who constitute a "separate, specialty element of the force." President Obama told reporters Monday, "As I've said from the start of this outbreak, I consider this a top national security priority. This is not just a matter of charity. ... This is an issue about our safety." Obama called for protocols to help stop the spread of the disease, including additional air passenger screening, while downplaying the risk of an epidemic in the United States. Ebola has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, with more than 7,400 suspected, probable and confirmed cases. The virus is transmitted through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, feces and vomit. The incubation period, from the time of infection to symptoms, is two to 21 days.
Nurse helped treat missionary, priest who died after contracting Ebola Photos Four more potential cases of Ebola were under observation Tuesday in Spain, health authorities said Tuesday, a day after a nurse's assistant became the first person known to have contracted the deadly virus outside Africa in the current outbreak. The woman helped treat two Spanish missionaries, both of whom had contracted Ebola in West Africa, one in Liberia and the other in Sierra Leone. Both died after returning to Spain. The developments come just as the organization Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) reports that a Norwegian staff member has contracted the deadly virus. The staffer had been working in the Sierra Leone city of Bo and was placed in isolation Sunday after developing a fever, the organization said. The worker is being sent to a treatment center in Europe. In Spain, no details have yet been given of exactly how the nurse's assistant contracted the virus, and her condition is unknown. Francisco Arnalis, head of internal medicine at the Carlos III Hospital, told a news conference that the three other potential Ebola cases are being monitored there. A hospital spokeswoman said later Tuesday that another nurse's assistant who is on the same team as the infected nurse's assistant is under observation. This more recent case was admitted to the hospital after she "started having a little bit of a temperature," said the spokeswoman, who wasn't named as is customary in Spain. Earlier, health officials explained that one of the people being monitored is the original nurse's assistant's husband, who faces a high risk of infection and had no protection. Another is a suspected case in a man who traveled overseas and has tested negative twice. The fourth, a nurse, is not a suspected case but has been brought in as a precaution after suffering diarrhea. She was exposed, but she was wearing protective gear, Arnalis said. Thirty people from Carlos III Hospital and 22 others from Alcorcon hospital plus family members are being monitored, according to authorities. It was not immediately known whether the nurse's assistant hospitalized late Tuesday was one of these 30 contacts at Carlos III Hospital. The hospital will not release information about the status of the nurse's assistant, who has not been named, in order to respect her privacy, director Rafael Santamaria said. The hospital has two potential treatments at its disposal, said Dr. Jose Ramon Arribas, one using an IV drip with the antibodies of Ebola survivors and the other an antiviral drug. "This is a treatment that the WHO (World Health Organization) has recommended, even though they haven't verified its efficacy," he said of the IV drip. EU We need to know what happened Spanish authorities have said that all the proper protocols and procedures were followed in the care of the two missionaries. But the European Union has asked for an explanation as to how the woman was infected. European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said on Tuesday that "Spain told us all the protocols have been followed, but obviously something wrong happened." There have been 10 evacuations of Ebola infected patients from Africa to Europe, eight of those within the European Union, Vincent said and it is first time that something like this has happened. "The hospitals where the patients are being taken are supposed to be equipped and ready to deal with Ebola patients," he said. "If protocols are being followed, it's highly unlikely that an outbreak could happen in the EU. But again, zero risk doesn't exist, particularly in a hospital, where staff deal with sick people. "We need to find out as soon as possible what happened and if we need to revise procedures." There will be an extra meeting of European officials to discuss the Spanish Ebola case on Wednesday, he said. The World Health Organization said it was "ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required," as it investigates the case and traces the infected woman's contacts. In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron will lead a Cabinet meeting to discuss way to coordinate how to handle response to Ebola there, if it's necessary. Cameron called Sierra Leone President Ernest Bai Koroma to discuss the status of the outbreak in the West African nation and talk about how aid the UK has provided is helping. According to Downing Street, the Sierra Leone leader said the situation continues to be "very serious" and there was a need to train more medical staff, improve burial processes and develop a better system for running service treatment centers. Unions question equipment used Some Spanish unions have blamed the government, saying they warned it that the personal protective equipment used by the medical team was not of the highest standard. Angry doctors and nurses outside the Carlos III Hospital where the nurse's assistant is being treated and where the two missionaries were cared for before her said they were outraged the pair had been brought to the hospital, one in August and the other in September. They said that the two priests, Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia Viejo, were almost dead when they arrived, and that they should not have been brought back to Spain, thereby putting other people's lives at risk. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato announced Monday that testing had confirmed the nurse's assistant has the virus. The husband of the nurse's assistant, who is under observation, is not sick, a spokesman for the Health Ministry said. It was not clear whether he is under quarantine. The couple have no children. The assistant was one of about 30 health professionals in Spain who helped treat the Ebola patients. They and the ambulance team that took her to the hospital are now reportedly under observation. No word on where she took her vacation Health officials said the assistant developed symptoms on September 30. She was not hospitalized until this week, when her only symptom was a fever. She was first taken to a hospital in southern Madrid before being transferred to Carlos III Hospital, where she had helped care for the Ebola patients. The second of the missionaries died on September 26, and she went on vacation a day later, health officials said. They have not said where that vacation was taken. A few days later, she reported that she was not feeling well but her temperatures were not very high, officials said. It was only several days later that her temperature soared and she was hospitalized. An investigation is underway to find everyone the assistant may have had contact with while infectious. So far, there are no other known related cases. Health authorities have urged people to stay calm, as they hope that the virus' spread is contained. "We are working in coordination to give the best care to the patient and to guarantee the safety of all citizens," said Mato, the health minister. Obama National security priority The news came amid growing fears in the United States that the disease could spread. The first person to be diagnosed in the United States with Ebola, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical but stable condition in Texas, according to Candace White, a spokeswoman for Texas Health. He is on a ventilator and receiving kidney dialysis, she said, adding that his liver function, which declined over the weekend, has improved. He is continuing to receive an investigational medication, White said. During a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention press conference on Monday, CNN asked Texas Department of State Health Services Dr. David Lakey how care protocols in Spain compared to those involving Duncan in Texas. Lakey said he personally went to the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital ward in Dallas where the patient is being treated, and saw that there was extensive security and a detailed method of how providers were protecting themselves. "They take this really seriously," he said, describing treatment protocol as "meticulous." CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said none of the people who Duncan came into contact with before his diagnosis that the CDC has identified for monitoring has shown symptoms. Frieden also said the agency has not made final decisions about possible ways to screen at airports in the United States. Meanwhile, some of the U.S. military personnel being deployed to Liberia to help tackle the Ebola crisis may come into contact with the virus, a Pentagon official said Tuesday. The head of U.S. Africa Command, Gen. David Rodriguez, said that while the majority of U.S. troops involved in the mission would not be exposed to the disease, those in mobile testing labs could have contact in that environment. "They're all trained at a very, very high level," Rodriguez told reporters of the lab personnel, who constitute a "separate, specialty element of the force." President Obama told reporters Monday, "As I've said from the start of this outbreak, I consider this a top national security priority. This is not just a matter of charity. ... This is an issue about our safety." Obama called for protocols to help stop the spread of the disease, including additional air passenger screening, while downplaying the risk of an epidemic in the United States. Ebola has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, with more than 7,400 suspected, probable and confirmed cases. The virus is transmitted through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, feces and vomit. The incubation period, from the time of infection to symptoms, is two to 21 days. Recommended
Spanish health authorities said Tuesday they are monitoring three more potential cases of Ebola, a day after a nurse's assistant became the first person known to have contracted Ebola outside Africa in the current outbreak. The woman helped treat two Spanish missionaries, both of whom had contracted Ebola in West Africa, one in Liberia and the other in Sierra Leone. Both died after returning to Spain. The developments come just as the organization Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) reports that a Norwegian staff member has contracted the deadly virus. The staffer had been working in the Sierra Leone city of Bo and was placed in isolation Sunday after developing a fever, the organization said. The worker is being sent to a treatment center in Europe. In Spain, no details have yet been given of exactly how the nurse's assistant contracted the virus, and her condition is unknown. Francisco Arnalis, head of internal medicine at the Carlos III Hospital, told a news conference that the three other potential Ebola cases are being monitored there. One is the assistant's husband, who faces a high risk of infection and had no protection. Another is a suspected case in a man who traveled overseas and has tested negative twice, health officials said. The third, a nurse, is not a suspected case but has been brought in as a precaution after suffering diarrhea. She was exposed, but she was wearing protective gear, Arnalis said. Another 22 contacts with the nurse's assistant outside the Carlos III Hospital are also being monitored, the head of the hospital said. The hospital will not release information about the status of the nurse's assistant, who has not been named, in order to respect her privacy, director Rafael Santamaria said. The hospital has two potential treatments at its disposal, said Dr. Jose Ramon Arribas, one using an IV drip with the antibodies of Ebola survivors and the other an antiviral drug. "This is a treatment that the WHO (World Health Organization) has recommended, even though they haven't verified its efficacy," he said of the IV drip. EU We need to know what happened Spanish authorities have said that all the proper protocols and procedures were followed in the care of the two missionaries. But the European Union has asked for an explanation as to how the woman was infected. European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said on Tuesday that "Spain told us all the protocols have been followed, but obviously something wrong happened." There have been 10 evacuations of Ebola infected patients from Africa to Europe, eight of those within the European Union, Vincent said and it is first time that something like this has happened. "The hospitals where the patients are being taken are supposed to be equipped and ready to deal with Ebola patients," he said. "If protocols are being followed, it's highly unlikely that an outbreak could happen in the EU. But again, zero risk doesn't exist, particularly in a hospital, where staff deal with sick people. "We need to find out as soon as possible what happened and if we need to revise procedures." There will be an extra meeting of European officials to discuss the Spanish Ebola case on Wednesday, he said. The World Health Organization said it was "ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required," as it investigates the case and traces the infected woman's contacts. In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron will lead a Cabinet meeting to discuss way to coordinate how to handle response to Ebola there, if it's necessary. Cameron called Sierra Leone President Ernest Bai Koroma to discuss the status of the outbreak in the West African nation and talk about how aid the UK has provided is helping. According to Downing Street, the Sierra Leone leader said the situation continues to be "very serious" and there was a need to train more medical staff, improve burial processes and develop a better system for running service treatment centers. Unions question equipment used Some Spanish unions have blamed the government, saying they warned it that the personal protective equipment used by the medical team was not of the highest standard. Angry doctors and nurses outside the Carlos III Hospital where the nurse's assistant is being treated and where the two missionaries were cared for before her said they were outraged the pair had been brought to the hospital, one in August and the other in September. They said that the two priests, Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia Viejo, were almost dead when they arrived, and that they should not have been brought back to Spain, thereby putting other people's lives at risk. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato announced Monday that testing had confirmed the nurse's assistant has the virus. The husband of the nurse's assistant, who is under observation, is not sick, a spokesman for the Health Ministry said. It was not clear whether he is under quarantine. The couple have no children. The assistant was one of about 30 health professionals in Spain who helped treat the Ebola patients. They and the ambulance team that took her to the hospital are now reportedly under observation. No word on where she took her vacation Health officials said the assistant developed symptoms on September 30. She was not hospitalized until this week, when her only symptom was a fever. She was first taken to a hospital in southern Madrid before being transferred to Carlos III Hospital, where she had helped care for the Ebola patients. The second of the missionaries died on September 26, and she went on vacation a day later, health officials said. They have not said where that vacation was taken. A few days later, she reported that she was not feeling well but her temperatures were not very high, officials said. It was only several days later that her temperature soared and she was hospitalized. An investigation is underway to find everyone the assistant may have had contact with while infectious. So far, there are no other known related cases. Health authorities have urged people to stay calm, as they hope that the virus' spread is contained. "We are working in coordination to give the best care to the patient and to guarantee the safety of all citizens," said Mato, the health minister. Obama National security priority The news came amid growing fears in the United States that the disease could spread. The first person to be diagnosed in the United States with Ebola, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical but stable condition in Texas, according to Candace White, a spokeswoman for Texas Health. He is on a ventilator and receiving kidney dialysis, she said, adding that his liver function, which declined over the weekend, has improved. He is continuing to receive an investigational medication, White said. During a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention press conference on Monday, CNN asked Texas Department of State Health Services Dr. David Lakey how care protocols in Spain compared to those involving Duncan in Texas. Lakey said he personally went to the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital ward in Dallas where the patient is being treated, and saw that there was extensive security and a detailed method of how providers were protecting themselves. "They take this really seriously," he said, describing treatment protocol as "meticulous." CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said none of the people who Duncan came into contact with before his diagnosis that the CDC has identified for monitoring has shown symptoms. Frieden also said the agency has not made final decisions about possible ways to screen at airports in the United States. Meanwhile, some of the U.S. military personnel being deployed to Liberia to help tackle the Ebola crisis may come into contact with the virus, a Pentagon official said Tuesday. The head of U.S. Africa Command, Gen. David Rodriguez, said that while the majority of U.S. troops involved in the mission would not be exposed to the disease, those in mobile testing labs could have contact in that environment. "They're all trained at a very, very high level," Rodriguez told reporters of the lab personnel, who constitute a "separate, specialty element of the force." President Obama told reporters Monday, "As I've said from the start of this outbreak, I consider this a top national security priority. This is not just a matter of charity. ... This is an issue about our safety." Obama called for protocols to help stop the spread of the disease, including additional air passenger screening, while downplaying the risk of an epidemic in the United States. Ebola has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, with more than 7,400 suspected, probable and confirmed cases. The virus is transmitted through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, feces and vomit. The incubation period, from the time of infection to symptoms, is two to 21 days.
Health workers transfer Ebola patient Father Miguel Pajares to a hospital in Madrid after flying him back from Liberia. A nurse has contracted the virus after treating the priest, who has since died. Photo Reuters The first case of Ebola transmission outside of West Africa has raised questions about how a nurse at a Spanish hospital contracted the virus and whether sufficient protocols were in place to protect health workers there. The nurse became infected at Madrid's Carlos III hospital while treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, a priest who contracted the virus in West Africa. The woman, a "sanitary technician," entered Garcia Viejo's room only twice, according to Spanish officials. In one case, she entered the room to treat him another time, after he had died, she entered to collect his belongings, according to Mercedes Vinuesa Sebastian, Spain's public health director. Both times, the nurse wore personal protective equipment. The nurse worked at Madrid's Hospital Carlos III. Photo AFP Spanish officials said they do not know what went wrong and are investigating. Advertisement "We are working to verify the exact source of contact to see if all strict protocols were followed," Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato said at a news conference on Monday, according to NBC News. European Union officials have issued a letter to Mato asking for clarification about how the nurse became infected even though all EU member states were required to take measures to avoid transmission. Investigating the new Ebola case ... Spanish Minister of Health, Social Services and Equality Ana Mato. Photo AFP "There is obviously a problem somewhere," a European Commission spokesman said, according to The Guardian. Health workers at the Carlos III Hospital protested on Tuesday, and others have raised concerns that the protective suits used by workers treating Ebola patients at the facility are not adequate. According to the Spanish newspaper El Pais, hospital staff provided photos of protective suits that use latex gloves attached using tape. Hospital staff members told the paper that the protective equipment should have been completely impermeable, but that it was not. The workers also said that the suits did not allow for autonomous breathing. Hospital officials denied that World Health Organisation recommendations were not followed in the treatment of both Garcia Viejo and another Spanish priest, 75 year old Miguel Pajares, who died of Ebola after being flown from West Africa to Spain, where he received the experimental drug ZMapp. "The suits used perfectly meet protocol, as well as the mandatory protection requirements for this disease," said Yolanda Fuentes, the deputy director of Carlos III hospital, according to El Pais. The WHO recommendations detail, in general terms, the types of equipment that are appropriate for treating a patient with hemorrhagic fevers, including Ebola. The WHO also outlines procedures for entering and exiting an infected patient's room, removing protective equipment and decontaminating surfaces inside and outside a patient's room. Failure to follow any of the steps in those procedures could potentially lead to infection. Hospital staff also alleged that waste from the patient's room was removed using an elevator that was shared by all hospital personnel, according to the Guardian. The nurse who contracted Ebola began experiencing symptoms on September 30, five days after Garcia Viejo died. Tests confirmed on Monday that she had contracted Ebola. After treating both Garcia Viejo and Pajares, the woman went on a vacation but remained in Madrid, officials said, according to Reuters. On Tuesday, 22 people who came into contact with the nurse were being monitored, but not isolated, according to Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital. The nurse's husband, who is not showing symptoms, and another health worker who is experiencing diarrhea but not fever, have been hospitalised. Early signs of Ebola infection include fever, diarrhea and headaches. A Nigerian man who recently returned to Spain has also been hospitalised, though the first test came back negative for Ebola, according to the Associated Press. The incident has raised fresh concerns that, despite assurances from global public health officials that Ebola cases can be safely managed in developed countries, sufficient precautions have not been taken. The WHO's European director told Reuters that additional imported cases in Europe are "unavoidable." "Such imported cases and similar events as have happened in Spain will happen also in the future, most likely," said Zsuzsanna Jakab. "It is quite unavoidable ... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around." The Washington Post
Doctors in Spain hospitalised three more people and rushed to identify dozens of others at risk after a nurse was infected with the deadly Ebola virus, raising fears of contagion in Europe. The European Union demanded answers about how the disease spread in a specialised disease unit while health staff protested over safety failures. The nurse worked at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III, where she cared for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus after being flown home from west Africa, where the disease has killed nearly 3,500 people. The Madrid nurse, identified by Spanish media as a woman in her forties called Teresa, became the first person to contract the disease outside Africa. Officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with before being isolated on Monday. They were monitoring 52 people mostly health staff. Read more What's scary about Ebola and reasons not to fear it "It would be very naive to think that there is no possibility of contagion," the government's health emergencies coordinator Fernando Simon told Cadena Ser radio. Doctors at the hospital said her husband was also at "high risk" and was put in isolation. Another "suspect case" a Spanish engineer recently returned from Nigeria was also being monitored. A fourth patient, one of the nurse's colleagues, who had suffered from diarrhoea, has also been taken in for observation, the hospital said. The infected nurse had treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who was infected with Ebola in Liberia and died on August 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on September 25. She is believed to have contracted the virus while caring for Garcia Viejo. The European Commission has written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation, an EU spokesman said in Brussels. US President Barack Obama warned on Monday that "some large countries are not doing enough" to tackle the epidemic. Spanish government officials said the nurse began to feel ill on September 30 while on leave after treating the two missionaries, but was not admitted to hospital until five days later. Health workers' unions said the nurse had called the Carlos III hospital when she felt ill but was first referred back to a local health centre. The hospital's director, Rafael Perez Santamarina, said she was not admitted at that time because she did not yet have a high fever or other Ebola symptoms. The nurse's husband Javier told El Mundo newspaper she "did everything they told her" when she reported feeling ill. Medical staff protested outside the main site of La Paz hospital in their white coats, yelling for Health Minister Ana Mato to resign. "People are freaked out," a cardiologist at the hospital told AFP. "We cannot understand how someone who was wearing a double protection suit and two pairs of gloves could have been contaminated." Health worker unions complained staff had not been adequately trained. "We do not have the infrastructure to tackle a virus like this," said Elena Moral, leader of the CSIF AGCM union. Ebola causes severe fever, vomiting, diarrhoea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. It spreads through contact and bodily fluids. There is no vaccine and no widely available cure, but one treatment, dubbed ZMapp, has shown promising early results and has been fast tracked for mass production. Ebola has caused 3,439 deaths out of 7,478 cases across five west African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal according to the latest WHO tally. Patients have been treated for the disease in Europe and the United States, but until now all the cases stemmed from people who caught the virus in west Africa. Madrid's IBEX 35 stock index closed 2.02 per cent lower and other European markets also fell on news of the infection, with travel and tourism groups hit hard. The International Monetary Fund warned in a report on Tuesday that economic damage from the Ebola outbreak could spread beyond west Africa and become global.
Health officials have revealed there are no plans to screen travellers entering the UK for the deadly Ebola virus, as more than 100 Army medics prepare to travel to Sierra Leone to help tackle the epidemic. Public Health England (PHE) said the overall risk of the virus to the UK remains "low" and the country has "robust, well developed and well tested NHS systems for managing unusual infectious diseases". It comes after a Spanish nurse contracted Ebola in the first known transmission outside west Africa. A PHE spokesman said "There are no plans to introduce entry screening for Ebola in the UK. This would require the UK to screen every returning traveller, as people could return to the UK from an affected country through any port of entry. This would be huge numbers of low risk people. "PHE has provided UK Border Force with advice on the assessment of an unwell patient on entry to UK." Dr Brian McCloskey, director of global health at PHE, said "UK hospitals have a proven record of dealing with imported infectious diseases. If an Ebola case is repatriated to, or detected in, the UK they would receive appropriate treatment in an isolation unit, with all appropriate protocols promptly activated." Personnel from 22 Field Hospital, normally based in York, are expected to sent on their humanitarian operation to west Africa within the next few weeks. They will staff a field hospital set up specifically to treat medics who have caught the disease, not members of the general public, and will operate a 12 bed facility. The medics have been undergoing an extensive training exercise in full protective suits, with simulated casualties in make up, at Strensall Barracks, York. The exercise which is expected to last two weeks has been running for 13 hours every day. Casualties with symptoms or suspicion of the Ebola virus, complete with realistic make up and prosthetic veins, present themselves to the teams who are dressed in full protective plastic suits and face masks. An Army spokeswoman said "They are going through all their procedures and getting atuned to wearing their personal protective equipment, working in quite hot temperatures. "The training centre, which was geared up to be a replica of Camp Bastion in Afghanistan, can vary the temperature and it is warm in there today. "The casualties come in and the medics test their procedures and working through using their protective equipment." The unprecedented Ebola outbreak this year has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, and become an escalating concern to the rest of the world. British nurse William Pooley, who contracted the virus in Sierra Leone, survived after he was treated at the Royal Free Hospital in London. International Development Secretary Justine Greening said the Government was continuing to keep the issue of tighter travel restrictions under review after a Spanish nurse contracted Ebola, and three others were placed under quarantine, at a Madrid hospital. She told BBC News "It doesn't change the assessment of the risk to the UK. "But what it does show is why we're right to be working with governments as we are in Sierra Leone to help them combat this disease where it's spreading so rapidly now." Meanwhile, the chairman of PHE said the UK was well prepared should any further cases of Ebola enter the country. Professor David Heymann, professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, urged health workers to be "suspicious" of any signs of fever from people who have visited the region. "The UK has already had a case and illustrated it has excellent protection for health workers," Prof Heymann said. "The UK has what is necessary in place. The best advice for health workers is always be prepared. "You should expect a case anywhere in the world and you should be prepared. "Trying to set up border controls is not the answer. It's a false security. "For health workers, they should be suspicious if someone has a fever or the early signs of Ebola and has just returned from West Africa." Prof Heymann said the suggestion that Ebola could become airborne was "irresponsible" because no virus transmitted by bodily fluids had ever mutated to airborne transmission. It follows comments from Anthony Banbury, the chief of the UN's Ebola mission, who told the Telegraph there was a "nightmare" chance that Ebola could become airborne if the epidemic is not brought under control fast enough. Armed Forces minister Mark Francois visited the exercise and said afterwards the aim was to reassure foreign health professionals that they could volunteer to fight ebola knowing they would receive excellent treatment if they contracted the virus. He said "The critical point is to have a world class medical facility available in Sierra Leone that can give other medical workers from around the world comfort, that if they were to become infected, they could go there and get the best medical treatment that we can provide." The aim was for Save the Children to run the facility once it was functioning well, he said. Lt Col Alison McCourt, the unit's commanding officer, said the operation would be challenging, especially following the news from Spain that a nurse had contracted ebola. "It would be wrong for me to comment on that," she said. "What I can say is that the training that my personnel are receiving and the personal protective equipment that we will be using minimises that risk as far as practically possible. "Our staff will know the dangers that they face, they will have been specifically trained to face those dangers whereas it is possible that other health care workers just working in routine departments within a hospital may not have had that equipment available to them." Private Kate Owen, a combat medic, said the experience of donning her protective suit and working in hot conditions had been "really beneficial". She said "The conditions are going to be quite arduous, but being in the Army, we are quite used to adapting to our environment."
Fears grew Tuesday that the Ebola epidemic was spreading outside Africa after three more people were isolated in Spain following the infection of a nurse in a Madrid hospital. The EU demanded answers about how the disease could have spread in Spain's most specialist unit treating Ebola where the nurse cared for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus after being flown home from west Africa. Ebola has been raging there since the beginning of the year, with nearly 3,500 confirmed deaths so far. Tests confirmed that the 40 year old nurse is the first person to contract the virus outside Africa. Doctors said her husband was at "high risk" and has been admitted to the La Paz Carlos III hospital, where the nurse worked. Another "suspect case" a man recently returned from abroad is also being monitored there. One of the nurse's colleagues, who has been suffering from diarrhoea, has also been taken in for observation. Madrid's stock market fell on the news, with travel and tourism groups worst hit. Shares in IAG, owner of the Spanish airline Iberia, tumbled more than six percent. Nurse ill for five days The infected nurse began to feel ill on September 30 while on leave after treating the two priests in the hospital's isolation unit. But she did not go to hospital until Sunday five days later complaining of a fever, government officials said. She is now being treated in the same unit. Health officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with, and were monitoring 30 people including co workers for Ebola symptoms. The infection also sparked questions about how safety procedures were applied when treating the two missionaries. "People are freaked out," a cardiologist at the hospital told AFP. "We cannot understand how someone who was wearing a double protection suit and two pairs of gloves could have been contaminated." She claimed Spain was not up to dealing with the hemorrhagic fever and questioned the decision to repatriate the missionaries. The nurse had treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who was infected with Ebola in Liberia and died on August 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on September 25. Pajares was the first patient in the current Ebola outbreak to be evacuated to Europe for treatment. The nurse is believed to have contracted the virus six weeks later while caring for Garcia Viejo. Officials said she visited his room twice, once to clean him and then to collect material after his death. The team that cared for the missionaries was closely monitored, they said. The European Commission has written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation, a Brussels spokesman said. The case followed a wake up call on Ebola from US President Barack Obama, who warned on Monday that "some large countries are not doing enough" to tackle the epidemic. 'Training not given' Elena Moral, leader of the CSIF AGCM public workers' union, told Spanish public radio "The precautionary measures that should have been taken were not effective. The necessary training was not given and we must find out who was responsible." The head of primary healthcare for the Madrid region, Antonio Alemany, told a news conference that the nurse, who has no children, was in a stable condition but still had a fever. News of her infection sparked renewed questions about Madrid's decision to repatriate infected missionaries from Africa. Critics said Spanish hospitals were not equipped to deal with Ebola. "We are working to see if all the protocols which were established were strictly followed," Health Minister Ana Mato said. "Spain follows all the recommendations of the World Health Organization." The Ebola virus causes fever, muscle pain, vomiting, diarrhoea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. It spreads through bodily fluids, and the only way to stop an outbreak is to isolate those who are infected. There is no vaccine, but one possible treatment, dubbed ZMapp, has been fast tracked for use. Ebola has caused 3,439 deaths out of 7,478 cases across five west African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal according to the latest WHO tally. Patients have been treated for the disease in Europe and the United States, but until now all the cases stemmed from people who caught the virus in west Africa. US health officials said a Liberian man diagnosed with Ebola in Texas had received an experimental drug called Brincidofovir, the first time the medicine has been used to fight the virus. Also on Monday, the charity Doctors Without Borders (MSF) announced that a Norwegian employee had contracted Ebola in Sierra Leone and would be repatriated shortly. Another MSF worker, a French nurse, caught the virus while volunteering in neighbouring Liberia but has been cured, the French government said, after being repatriated. That has not stopped fear of the disease spreading however, with parents at a primary school in the Paris suburb of Boulogne Billancourt refusing to let their children go to school because a pupil had just come back from Guinea, one the countries worst hit by the virus.
Spanish Ebola case 'should not have happened' experts (10 07 18 14) The first home grown European case of Ebola, in a Spanish nurse, was avoidable, virologists said Tuesday as the EU demanded answers from Madrid. Though there is always a threat to health workers of infection with the virus spread through contact with body fluids, the risk is small and well understood and existing protections effective, the specialists said. "If appropriate containment measures were adopted this really should not have happened,'' said Jonathan Ball, a virology professor at the University of Notthingham. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again.'' The Spanish government said Monday that a nurse had contracted the hemorrhagic fever after treating two patients who died at a Madrid hospital both missionaries infected in West Africa, where Ebola has claimed more than 3,400 lives. The 40 year old woman is in a stable condition. The European Union on Tuesday demanded an explanation from Spain as to how she could have become infected. In comments to Britain's Science Media Center, experts said protective suits worn by health workers, coupled with safe disposal of patients' bodily waste, substantially reduced the risk. "The recent report of a Spanish nurse who has contracted the virus... is of concern as it suggests that the barrier methods and training were not sufficient to protect healthcare workers and prevent secondary infection,'' said virology professor David Evans of the University of Warwick. AFP
MADRID, Spain Spain was investigating Tuesday how a nurse in Madrid could have become infected with Ebola, sparking fears of the first outbreak outside Africa. The inquiry was launched as the EU demanded answers from the Spanish authorities about how the disease could have spread in a specialist Madrid unit where the woman treated two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus. Tests confirmed she has the disease, government officials said, making her the first person to contract the virus outside Africa. The 40 year old began to feel ill on Sept. 30 while on leave after treating the two patients in the isolation unit of Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital. But she did not go to hospital until Sunday five days later complaining of a fever, government officials said. She is now being treated herself in the same unit. Health officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with, and were monitoring 30 people including co workers and her husband for Ebola symptoms. The infection also sparked questions about how safety procedures were applied when treating the two missionaries. "People are freaked out," a cardiologist at the hospital told AFP. "We cannot understand how someone who was wearing a double protection suit and two pairs of gloves could have been contaminated." She claimed Spain was not up to dealing with the hemorrhagic fever and questioned the decision to repatriate the missionaries. The nurse had treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who was infected with Ebola in Liberia and died on Aug. 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on Sept. 25. Pajares was the first patient in the current Ebola outbreak to be evacuated to Europe for treatment. The infected nurse is believed to have contracted the virus six weeks later while caring for Garcia Viejo, whose room officials said she visited twice, once to treat him and once to clean the room. Both missionaries were treated in the isolation unit at the hospital, and the medical team that cared for them were closely monitored. In Brussels on Tuesday an EU spokesman said the European Commission had written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation. The case followed a wake up call on Ebola from U.S. President Barack Obama, who warned on Monday that "some large countries are not doing enough" to tackle the epidemic.
Spanish health authorities reacted forcefully today after a nurse's aide was found to have contracted Ebola, putting her in an isolation unit, quarantining her husband and two other people, and getting a court order to euthanize her dog. The case marked the first time the disease has been contracted outside of west Africa and has alarmed health workers throughout Europe. The European Union has demanded an explanation from Spain as to how the health worker could have become infected. "Tomorrow morning, we will have an audio conference call of EU's Health Security Committee," said Frederic Vincent, a spokesman for European Health Commission. "We will all listen very carefully to what the Spanish officials have to tell us on why was the hospital not ready for Ebola patients." The response by Madrid raised the specter that pets could spread the disease. The city of Madrid got a court order to euthanize and incinerate the woman's dog over her and her husband's objections, according to the Associated Press. The dog is a mixed breed pooch named Excalibur. The government said available scientific knowledge suggests a risk that the dog could transmit the virus to humans. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says on its official website that Ebola can be transmitted by mammals. Dogs, which are mammals, usually don't get symptoms, but they can spread the virus through biting, licking, feces and urine. The Spanish patient, who has not been publicly identified, worked as the equivalent of a nurse's aide at Madrid's Carlos III hospital. She was part of a team that treated two Ebola patients who were repatriated from West Africa after contracting the disease. The medical team treated a missionary Miguel Pajares, 75, who was repatriated home from Liberia in August and died five days later. The same team took care of Mario Garcia Viejo, 69, a Spanish missionary who got infected in Sierra Leone and was flown to Madrid for treatment four days before he died on Sept. 25. Texas Ebola Patient Thomas Eric Duncan Now Getting Experimental Drug What to Know About the Experimental Drug Being Given to the Texas Ebola Patient US Journalist With Ebola Leaves Liberia to Be Treated in Nebraska The woman, 44, had contact with Viejo twice. Once when he was still alive and she had to change his diapers, and a second time after he died and she had to take out his sheets, clothing and bodily wastes, public health official said. She went on holiday after Viejo's death, although officials insist she never left Madrid. Officials said the woman wasn't feeling well for a week before she was admitted to the isolation unit. El Mundo daily reported that it was the nurse who asked repeatedly to be tested for Ebola, before it was done on Monday. Since her disease was diagnosed, her husband, who has no sign of disease, and two more people including a colleague who treated Viejo are being monitored in the hospital in a bid to try to stop the spread of the deadly virus. In addition, health authorities said they are monitoring more than 50 possible contacts of the nurse's aide. The team has a strict safety protocol in place, which includes double impregnated gown, gloves, masks and protective eye glasses, according to health officials. "We are investigating how she got contaminated and if protocols were respected," said Rosa Serrano, an official with Spanish health ministry. Staff at the hospital told El Pais daily that the protective gowns they were using did not meet World Health Organization criteria, which require them to be impermeable and have a breathing equipment. Staff also complained about low quality latex gloves. Spain was the first European country to repatriate home infected patients for treatment. Some health professionals said that Spanish hospitals were not well equipped to handle Ebola patients. "For instance in the U.S. there are 10 hospitals with level 4 isolation and here only Carlos III with level 2 and level 3," says Pedro Martinez of AMYTS, the union representing doctors. Despite the situation in Spain, European Health Commission thinks that a European Ebola epidemic "is very unlikely, and that in some way it could be a lesson for other member states," Vincent said.
Nurse helped treat missionary, priest who died after contracting Ebola Photos Breaking news update at 6 51 p.m. ET Another nurse's assistant in Spain is under observation on suspicion of being infected with the Ebola virus, a spokeswoman at Madrid's Carlos III Hospital said. This person is on the same team as the nurse's assistant who became the first person known to have contracted Ebola outside Africa in the current outbreak. Original story published at 4 09 p.m. ET Spanish health authorities said Tuesday they are monitoring three more potential cases of Ebola, a day after a nurse's assistant became the first person known to have contracted Ebola outside Africa in the current outbreak. The woman helped treat two Spanish missionaries, both of whom had contracted Ebola in West Africa, one in Liberia and the other in Sierra Leone. Both died after returning to Spain. The developments come just as the organization Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) reports that a Norwegian staff member has contracted the deadly virus. The staffer had been working in the Sierra Leone city of Bo and was placed in isolation Sunday after developing a fever, the organization said. The worker is being sent to a treatment center in Europe. In Spain, no details have yet been given of exactly how the nurse's assistant contracted the virus, and her condition is unknown. Francisco Arnalis, head of internal medicine at the Carlos III Hospital, told a news conference that the three other potential Ebola cases are being monitored there. One is the assistant's husband, who faces a high risk of infection and had no protection. Another is a suspected case in a man who traveled overseas and has tested negative twice, health officials said. The third, a nurse, is not a suspected case but has been brought in as a precaution after suffering diarrhea. She was exposed, but she was wearing protective gear, Arnalis said. Another 22 contacts with the nurse's assistant outside the Carlos III Hospital are also being monitored, the head of the hospital said. The hospital will not release information about the status of the nurse's assistant, who has not been named, in order to respect her privacy, director Rafael Santamaria said. The hospital has two potential treatments at its disposal, said Dr. Jose Ramon Arribas, one using an IV drip with the antibodies of Ebola survivors and the other an antiviral drug. "This is a treatment that the WHO (World Health Organization) has recommended, even though they haven't verified its efficacy," he said of the IV drip. EU We need to know what happened Spanish authorities have said that all the proper protocols and procedures were followed in the care of the two missionaries. But the European Union has asked for an explanation as to how the woman was infected. European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said on Tuesday that "Spain told us all the protocols have been followed, but obviously something wrong happened." There have been 10 evacuations of Ebola infected patients from Africa to Europe, eight of those within the European Union, Vincent said and it is first time that something like this has happened. "The hospitals where the patients are being taken are supposed to be equipped and ready to deal with Ebola patients," he said. "If protocols are being followed, it's highly unlikely that an outbreak could happen in the EU. But again, zero risk doesn't exist, particularly in a hospital, where staff deal with sick people. "We need to find out as soon as possible what happened and if we need to revise procedures." There will be an extra meeting of European officials to discuss the Spanish Ebola case on Wednesday, he said. The World Health Organization said it was "ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required," as it investigates the case and traces the infected woman's contacts. In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron will lead a Cabinet meeting to discuss way to coordinate how to handle response to Ebola there, if it's necessary. Cameron called Sierra Leone President Ernest Bai Koroma to discuss the status of the outbreak in the West African nation and talk about how aid the UK has provided is helping. According to Downing Street, the Sierra Leone leader said the situation continues to be "very serious" and there was a need to train more medical staff, improve burial processes and develop a better system for running service treatment centers. Unions question equipment used Some Spanish unions have blamed the government, saying they warned it that the personal protective equipment used by the medical team was not of the highest standard. Angry doctors and nurses outside the Carlos III Hospital where the nurse's assistant is being treated and where the two missionaries were cared for before her said they were outraged the pair had been brought to the hospital, one in August and the other in September. They said that the two priests, Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia Viejo, were almost dead when they arrived, and that they should not have been brought back to Spain, thereby putting other people's lives at risk. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato announced Monday that testing had confirmed the nurse's assistant has the virus. The husband of the nurse's assistant, who is under observation, is not sick, a spokesman for the Health Ministry said. It was not clear whether he is under quarantine. The couple have no children. The assistant was one of about 30 health professionals in Spain who helped treat the Ebola patients. They and the ambulance team that took her to the hospital are now reportedly under observation. No word on where she took her vacation Health officials said the assistant developed symptoms on September 30. She was not hospitalized until this week, when her only symptom was a fever. She was first taken to a hospital in southern Madrid before being transferred to Carlos III Hospital, where she had helped care for the Ebola patients. The second of the missionaries died on September 26, and she went on vacation a day later, health officials said. They have not said where that vacation was taken. A few days later, she reported that she was not feeling well but her temperatures were not very high, officials said. It was only several days later that her temperature soared and she was hospitalized. An investigation is underway to find everyone the assistant may have had contact with while infectious. So far, there are no other known related cases. Health authorities have urged people to stay calm, as they hope that the virus' spread is contained. "We are working in coordination to give the best care to the patient and to guarantee the safety of all citizens," said Mato, the health minister. Obama National security priority The news came amid growing fears in the United States that the disease could spread. The first person to be diagnosed in the United States with Ebola, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical but stable condition in Texas, according to Candace White, a spokeswoman for Texas Health. He is on a ventilator and receiving kidney dialysis, she said, adding that his liver function, which declined over the weekend, has improved. He is continuing to receive an investigational medication, White said. During a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention press conference on Monday, CNN asked Texas Department of State Health Services Dr. David Lakey how care protocols in Spain compared to those involving Duncan in Texas. Lakey said he personally went to the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital ward in Dallas where the patient is being treated, and saw that there was extensive security and a detailed method of how providers were protecting themselves. "They take this really seriously," he said, describing treatment protocol as "meticulous." CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said none of the people who Duncan came into contact with before his diagnosis that the CDC has identified for monitoring has shown symptoms. Frieden also said the agency has not made final decisions about possible ways to screen at airports in the United States. Meanwhile, some of the U.S. military personnel being deployed to Liberia to help tackle the Ebola crisis may come into contact with the virus, a Pentagon official said Tuesday. The head of U.S. Africa Command, Gen. David Rodriguez, said that while the majority of U.S. troops involved in the mission would not be exposed to the disease, those in mobile testing labs could have contact in that environment. "They're all trained at a very, very high level," Rodriguez told reporters of the lab personnel, who constitute a "separate, specialty element of the force." President Obama told reporters Monday, "As I've said from the start of this outbreak, I consider this a top national security priority. This is not just a matter of charity. ... This is an issue about our safety." Obama called for protocols to help stop the spread of the disease, including additional air passenger screening, while downplaying the risk of an epidemic in the United States. Ebola has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, with more than 7,400 suspected, probable and confirmed cases. The virus is transmitted through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, feces and vomit. The incubation period, from the time of infection to symptoms, is two to 21 days. Recommended
As she waited for her bus next to an advert urging people to donate money for the fight against Ebola overseas, Elena Felican could only shake her head at how close the threat posed by the virus now felt to her in Spain. "My sister called me first thing this morning, telling me not to go to near the hospital," said the catering worker. "She told me the patient lived in Alcorc n. How does this happen? It's really scary." Few details have emerged about the first person known to have contracted the Ebola virus outside west Africa. The Spanish nurse, who tested positive on Monday, was part of a team that cared for two elderly Spanish missionaries who both died after being evacuated to Madrid for treatment. On Tuesday night her husband said she had followed all the regulations. "She did all that they told her to. At no moment was she worried about being infected," he told El Mundo. The pair had intended to go on holiday, but changed their plans after he injured his leg, he told the newspaper in a phone interview from the room where he has been isolated. He complained that health authorities had told him his dog would have to be put down because it had been in contact with his wife. "They told me that if I didn't give them my authorisation, they would get a court order and enter the house by force to kill the dog. Then what will they do next? Sacrifice me too?" In Alcorc n, a city of 170,000 people on the outskirts of Madrid, many wondered just how worried they should be. "She might have been living in this neighbourhood for days with Ebola," said Felican. "Did she go to the supermarket? The gym? We don't know anything." Three primary schools ringed the hospital where the nurse had tested positive, she pointed out, and all of them were open on Tuesday. Her concerns were echoed inside the imposing hospital. Juan Pulido, who sat casually flipping through a newspaper while he waited for his wife to finish her appointment, said his family had urged him not to go. "Every day I sit here, waiting for my wife. I decided today would be no exception," said the retiree, brushing off their worries. "But it seems like nobody else dared to come it's empty today." The infected nurse was transported to Madrid's Carlos III hospital late on Monday. She was placed in isolation, as was her husband, who has shown no signs of the virus. Health officials said on Tuesday they were monitoring 50 more people who may have come into contact with the nurse. Authorities placed a second nurse from the same team in isolation after she complained of diarrhoea. Noting that she did not have a fever, the most common initial symptom for Ebola, doctors said her initial test results were negative. A man who had recently travelled from Nigeria to Spain was also in quarantine at the same hospital but tested negative for Ebola in his first test. Health authorities said they had two priorities compiling a list of all the potential contacts that the woman had before being hospitalised, and determining exactly how she had been infected. The nurse had helped care for Miguel Pajares, 75, who was the first person to be repatriated to European soil for treatment in August, but she is thought to have become infected while looking after Manuel Garc a Viejo, 69, who died in Madrid after being evacuated from Sierra Leone two weeks ago. The nurseShe would have entered Garc a Viejo's room twice, said Antonio Alemany, from the regional government of Madrid. The first time to was to change a nappy and the second time was to collect material from his room after he died. After complaining of a fever on 30 September, the nurse was told to check herself into hospital if her temperature exceeded 38.6C. Fernando Sim n, of Spain's health ministry, acknowledged on Tuesday that it might have been better to have admitted her to hospital right away despite her not showing serious symptoms. When she was admitted on Monday, the nurse remained in a bed in the emergency room, separated from other patients only by curtains, while waiting for her test results to come back, hospital staff said. Several associations representing health professionals in Spain painted a picture of a healthcare system reeling from cutbacks, drastically underfunded to tackle the challenge of Ebola, and led by a health ministry creating policy on the fly. Elena Moral, of the CSI F, a union that represents healthcare professionals, said the delay in admitting the nurse to hospital hinted at deep flaws in the protocol. "A patient suspected of having Ebola and a history of working with Ebola patients should have been put in the first ambulance they could find." She dismissed any suggestion of human error, pointing to a lack of training, infrastructure and safety measures. In some cases, training for health professionals dealing with Ebola was limited to a 15 or 20 minute talk, she said. In July a group of nurses in Madrid brought a complaint before a judge in Madrid over the "lack of training and knowledge regarding protocols" when it came to treating potential Ebola cases. Moral also laid blame on the impact of austerity measures on the Spanish healthcare system. "We've been protesting for a long time that the dismantling of the Carlos III hospital could provoke extreme situations like this one." In recent years, she said, the Carlos III hospital was closed, gutted of its emergency rooms and then turned into a hospital specialising in tropical diseases. "The repatriation of the two missionaries turned the hospital into something just short of a field hospital. Authorities activated the protocols without keeping in mind the actual state of the hospital." Opposition politicians called on the health minister, Ana Mato, to explain the safety lapses, while around 200 health professionals gathered outside a hospital in Madrid calling for her resignation. The European commission said it had written to Mato "to obtain some clarification" as to how the nurse had become infected. "There is obviously a problem somewhere," said the commission spokesman, Fr d ric Vincent. Spanish health authorities said medics treating Ebola patients in Spain followed the protocols laid out by the World Health Organisation, but their claims were widely disputed. While level 4 protective equipment is required to attend to Ebola patients, healthcare workers in Spain who treated the missionaries had only level 2 equipment, said Juan Carlos Mejias, of Satse, a union that represents nurses. "Level 4 is what's being used in other European countries." In August, when Satse learned of plans to repatriate a patient with Ebola to Spain for treatment, it asked the health ministry for a written description of the protocols that would be used. "How many nurses would be involved? How would the nurses be monitored afterwards?" said Mejias. He said the union received no response, suggesting "there was a serious improvisation in how the situation was handled". Inside Alcorc n hospital, two women working at the hospital gift shop said they knew only what had been reported in the media. "Our co worker left after her shift last night wondering why there were journalists outside the hospital. Nobody told us anything or warned us that we should be careful," said one. "At least they could have given us hand sanitiser."
MADRID Spain was investigating on Tuesday (Oct 7) how a nurse in Madrid could have become infected with Ebola, sparking fears of the first outbreak outside Africa. The inquiry was launched as the EU demanded answers from the Spanish authorities about how the disease could have spread in a specialist Madrid unit where the woman treated two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus. Tests confirmed she has the disease, government officials said, making her the first person to contract the virus outside Africa. The 40 year old began to feel ill on September 30 while on leave after treating the two patients in the isolation unit of Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital. But she did not go to hospital until Sunday five days later complaining of a fever, government officials said. She is now being treated herself in the same unit. Health officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with, and were monitoring 30 people including co workers and her husband for Ebola symptoms. The infection also sparked questions about how safety procedures were applied when treating the two missionaries. "People are freaked out," a cardiologist at the hospital told AFP. "We cannot understand how someone who was wearing a double protection suit and two pairs of gloves could have been contaminated." She claimed Spain was not up to dealing with the hemorrhagic fever and questioned the decision to repatriate the missionaries. The nurse had treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who was infected with Ebola in Liberia and died on August 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on September 25. Pajares was the first patient in the current Ebola outbreak to be evacuated to Europe for treatment. The infected nurse is believed to have contracted the virus six weeks later while caring for Garcia Viejo, whose room officials said she visited twice, once to treat him and once to clean the room. Both missionaries were treated in the isolation unit at the hospital, and the medical team that cared for them were closely monitored. In Brussels on Tuesday an EU spokesman said the European Commission had written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation. The case followed a wake up call on Ebola from US President Barack Obama, who warned on Monday that "some large countries are not doing enough" to tackle the epidemic. 'TRAINING NOT GIVEN' Elena Moral, leader of the CSIF AGCM public workers' union, told Spanish public radio "The precautionary measures that should have been taken were not effective. The necessary training was not given and we must find out who was responsible." The head of primary healthcare for the Madrid region, Antonio Alemany, told a news conference late Monday that the nurse, who is married but has no children, was in a stable condition but still had a fever. News of her infection sparked renewed questions about Madrid's decision to repatriate infected missionaries from Africa. Critics said the nation's hospitals were not adequately equipped to deal with Ebola. "We are working to see if all the protocols which were established were strictly followed," Health Minister Ana Mato told the news conference. "Spain follows all the recommendations of the World Health Organization." The Ebola virus causes fever, muscle pain, vomiting, diarrhoea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. It spreads through bodily fluids, and the only way to stop an outbreak is to isolate those who are infected. There is no vaccine to prevent it, but one possible treatment, dubbed ZMapp, has been fast tracked for use. Ebola has caused 3,439 deaths out of 7,478 cases across five west African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal, according to the latest WHO tally. Patients have been treated for the disease in Europe and the United States, but until now all the cases stemmed from people who caught the virus in west Africa. OBAMA'S WARNING Obama has vowed to press world leaders to step up the global fight against the deadly epidemic. US health officials said a Liberian man diagnosed with Ebola in Texas had received an experimental drug called Brincidofovir, the first time the medicine has been used to fight the virus. Also on Monday, the charity Doctors Without Borders (MSF) announced that a Norwegian employee had contracted Ebola in Sierra Leone and would be repatriated shortly. Another MSF worker, a French nurse, caught the virus while volunteering in neighbouring Liberia but has been cured, the French government said, after being repatriated. That has not stopped fear of the disease spreading however, with parents at a primary school in the Paris suburb of Boulogne Billancourt refusing to let their children go to school because a pupil had just come back from Guinea, one the countries worst hit by the virus.
Share Doctors in Spain hospitalised three more people and rushed to identify dozens of others at risk after a nurse was infected with the deadly Ebola virus, raising fears of contagion in Europe. The European Union demanded answers about how the disease spread in a specialised disease unit while health staff protested over safety failures. The nurse worked at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III, where she cared for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus after being flown home from west Africa, where the disease has killed nearly 3500 people. The Madrid nurse, identified by Spanish media as a woman in her forties called Teresa, became the first person to contract the disease outside Africa. Officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with before being isolated. They were monitoring 52 people mostly health staff. "It would be very naive to think that there is no possibility of contagion," the government's health emergencies coordinator Fernando Simon told Cadena Ser radio. Spanish nurse first to contract Ebola outside AfricaHigh risk Ebola could reach France and UK by end October, scientists calculate Doctors at the hospital said her husband was also at "high risk" and was put in isolation. Another "suspect case" a Spanish engineer recently returned from Nigeria was also being monitored. A fourth patient, one of the nurse's colleagues, who had suffered from diarrhoea, has also been taken in for observation, the hospital said. Risk of contagion The infected nurse had treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who was infected with Ebola in Liberia and died on August 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on September 25. She is believed to have contracted the virus while caring for Garcia Viejo. The European Commission has written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation, an EU spokesman said in Brussels. US President Barack Obama warned that "some large countries are not doing enough" to tackle the epidemic. Spanish government officials said the nurse began to feel ill on September 30 while on leave after treating the two missionaries, but was not admitted to hospital until five days later. Health workers' unions said the nurse had called the Carlos III hospital when she felt ill but was first referred back to a local health centre. The hospital's director, Rafael Perez Santamarina, said she was not admitted at that time because she did not yet have a high fever or other Ebola symptoms. The nurse's husband Javier told El Mundo newspaper she "did everything they told her" when she reported feeling ill. Medical staff protested outside the main site of La Paz hospital in their white coats, yelling for Health Minister Ana Mato to resign. "People are freaked out," a cardiologist at the hospital told AFP. "We cannot understand how someone who was wearing a double protection suit and two pairs of gloves could have been contaminated." Health worker unions complained staff had not been adequately trained. "We do not have the infrastructure to tackle a virus like this," said Elena Moral, leader of the CSIF AGCM union. Economic threat Ebola causes severe fever, vomiting, diarrhoea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. It spreads through contact and bodily fluids. There is no vaccine and no widely available cure, but one treatment, dubbed ZMapp, has shown promising early results and has been fast tracked for mass production. Ebola has caused 3439 deaths out of 7478 cases across five west African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal according to the latest WHO tally. Patients have been treated for the disease in Europe and the United States, but until now all the cases stemmed from people who caught the virus in west Africa. Madrid's IBEX 35 stock index closed 2.02 percent lower and other European markets also fell on news of the infection, with travel and tourism groups hit hard. The International Monetary Fund warned in a report this week that economic damage from the Ebola outbreak could spread beyond west Africa and become global.
PARIS The first home grown European case of Ebola, in a Spanish nurse, was avoidable, virologists said Tuesday (Oct 7) as the EU demanded answers from Madrid. Though there is always a threat to health workers of infection with the virus spread through contact with body fluids, the risk is small and well understood and existing protections effective, the specialists said. "If appropriate containment measures were adopted this really should not have happened," said Jonathan Ball, a virology professor at the University of Notthingham. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again." The Spanish government said Monday that a nurse had contracted the haemorrhagic fever after treating two patients who died at a Madrid hospital both missionaries infected in West Africa, where Ebola has claimed more than 3,400 lives. The 40 year old woman is in a stable condition. The European Union on Tuesday demanded an explanation from Spain as to how she could have become infected. In comments to Britain's Science Media Centre, experts said protective suits worn by health workers, coupled with safe disposal of patients' bodily waste, substantially reduced the risk. "The recent report of a Spanish nurse who has contracted the virus... is of concern as it suggests that the barrier methods and training were not sufficient to protect healthcare workers and prevent secondary infection," said virology professor David Evans of the University of Warwick. WASTE DISPOSAL KEY Ben Neuman, an expert from the University of Reading, said investigators will have to look closely at the disposal of waste at the hospital where she worked. "Nurses face a problem in that a person who is sick with Ebola can make quite a lot of highly infectious waste, as the patient loses fluid through diarrhoea and vomiting. Those bodily fluids can contain millions of Ebola viruses, and it only takes one to transfer the infection." Another concern was that the nurse had gone on holiday the day after the second patient died on Sep 25, though authorities have not said where she went. After contracting the virus, it takes up to 21 days for a person to develop symptoms, which is when they become infectious. "Reality is that anyone who suspects that they have been exposed to the virus, unless they were properly protected from infection, should not travel until this 21 day incubation period has passed," said Ball. The case underlined the importance of following protection measures to a tee, the experts said. But there was always a risk, however small. A tiny amount of Ebola containing liquid could splash on protective garments and be transferred to a person's skin, for example. "As the African outbreak perfectly illustrates, healthcare workers put their life on the line, so everything should be done to ensure that risks are minimised as much as possible," said Ball. It was also a reminder that the risk of such sporadic exports will increase as more and more people become infected in West Africa. "That is why it is so important for the international community to ramp up their efforts to combat this deadly disease," Ball said.
The Prime Minister is to convene a meeting of the Government's Cobra emergency committee to discuss the growing threat to the UK from the spread of Ebola. It comes after a Spanish nurse became the first person to contract the disease outside Africa, and as the United States drew up plans to screen arrivals for the virus. But public health officials in this country ruled out such a move. Thirty medical staff in Madrid are now being monitored for signs of the virus, with four people, including the nurse's husband, placed in quarantine. David Cameron will chair a session of the emergency Cobra committee in Whitehall on Wednesday morning to discuss the growing threat to the UK. It comes after the World Health Organisation said more cases in Europe are now "quite unavoidable". A Downing Street spokesman said "As part of the Government's ongoing efforts to combat the outbreak of Ebola in West Africa, the Prime Minister will chair this week's Cobr meeting. This is part of an ongoing series of Cobr meetings to coordinate the UK response that started in late July and has been in the diary for some time." Ahead of the meeting, Mr Cameron called the President of Sierra Leone to be updated on their situation, and discussed the use of 125m UK aid, including support for 700 extra beds. Ministers announced plans to send more than 100 army medics to Sierra Leone to help tackle the crisis and treat medics with the disease. Latest forecasts from US scientists warn of a 50 per cent chance that the virus could reach British shores within three weeks. Universities and schools have also been sent advice warning them to look out for pupils showing signs of fever who have travelled from West Africa. The unprecedented Ebola outbreak this year has killed more than 3,400 people in Africa, and become an increasing concern across the rest of the world. Earlier this week President Barack Obama indicated that the US now plans to screen incoming air passengers for the virus. But Public Health England (PHE) said it does not intend to introduce screening for travellers from West Africa, insisting such efforts would be impractical, and mean checks on "huge numbers of low risk people". Officials said if a case of Ebola was reported in the UK, the affected person would be isolated and protective measures would be implemented. PHE said the overall chance of the virus entering Britain remained "low" and the country has "robust, well developed and well tested NHS systems for managing unusual infectious diseases". However officials described a "real risk" the disease could reach British shores, while British virologists said the arrival of the virus now appeared "inevitable". On Tuesday the European Commission launched an investigation into the actions of the Spanish authorities, and why it was that the Spanish nurse, treating repatriated Ebola patients, was not diagnosed and placed in isolation until a week after she began feeling unwell. The Spanish nurse, 44, contracted the virus after helping to treat two repatriated priests who both died. She reportedly contacted doctors to say she was suffering from a fever and fatigue on September 30, but did not present herself to her local hospital for more than one week. International Development Secretary Justine Greening said the Government was continuing to keep the issue of tighter travel restrictions under review following the Spanish case of Ebola. "It doesn't change the assessment of the risk to the UK," she said. "But what it does show is why we're right to be working with governments as we are in Sierra Leone to help them combat this disease where it's spreading so rapidly now." A spokesman for the Department of Health said "We are aware of the situation in Spain and are monitoring it closely. "This is a reminder that we must support healthcare workers in maintaining the most rigorous infection control procedures when dealing with Ebola. The NHS has tried and tested systems for managing infectious diseases, and we continue to inform clinicians about the signs of Ebola, the need for vigilance and the action to take if they have cause for concern about a particular patient." On Tuesday Boris Johnson has said he is growing increasingly concerned that Ebola will arrive in Britain. The London Mayor said that his 'alarm levels' were rising and he would be investigating what could be done to stall the disease. Speaking on LBC Radio to Nick Ferrari he said "One's concern does start to rise Nick. I won't hide it from you and I won't hide it from listeners. "I will be seeking further information about what exactly we are going to be doing because it is clear that the thing is very, very contagious and lethal. "My alarm levels, I won't hide it from you, my alarm levels about this are rising." Army personnel from 22 Field Hospital, normally based in York, are expected to send a humanitarian operation to west Africa within the next few weeks. They will staff a field hospital set up specifically to treat medics who have caught the disease. They will staff a field hospital set up specifically to treat medics who have caught the disease, not members of the general public, and will operate a 12 bed facility. The medics have been undergoing an extensive training exercise in full protective suits, with simulated casualties in make up, at Strensall Barracks, York. The exercise which is expected to last two weeks has been running for 13 hours every day. Casualties with symptoms or suspicion of the Ebola virus, complete with realistic make up and prosthetic veins, present themselves to the teams who are dressed in full protective plastic suits and face masks. Minister for the Armed Forces, Mark Francois, said "The Ebola virus represents a global threat to public health and we will not stand idly by. "This UK has been at the forefront of responding to the epidemic and our medics will continue the great work already carried out by the military engineers, planners, DfID and FCO representatives and NGOs. "This operation will involve a unique set of challenges but I believe that our military medics, who we are extremely proud of, have the ability to provide support to the World Health Organisation in helping to bring the outbreak under control." The unprecedented Ebola outbreak this year has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, and become an escalating concern to the rest of the world. British nurse William Pooley, who contracted the virus in Sierra Leone, survived after he was treated at the Royal Free Hospital in London. International Development Secretary Justine Greening said the Government was continuing to keep the issue of tighter travel restrictions under review, following the case in Spain. She told BBC News "It doesn't change the assessment of the risk to the UK. "But what it does show is why we're right to be working with governments as we are in Sierra Leone to help them combat this disease where it's spreading so rapidly now." A spokesman for the Department of Health said "We are aware of the situation in Spain and are monitoring it closely. "This is a reminder that we must support healthcare workers in maintaining the most rigorous infection control procedures when dealing with Ebola. The NHS has tried and tested systems for managing infectious diseases, and we continue to inform clinicians about the signs of Ebola, the need for vigilance and the action to take if they have cause for concern about a particular patient." Ebola Justine Greening MP plays down risk to UK
The first case of Ebola transmission outside of West Africa has raised questions about how a nurse at a Spanish hospital contracted the virus and whether sufficient protocols were in place to protect health workers there. The nurse became infected at Madrid's Carlos III hospital while treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, a priest who contracted the virus in West Africa. The woman, a "sanitary technician," entered Garcia Viejo's room only twice, according to Spanish officials. In one case, she entered the room to change his diaper another time, after he had died, she entered to collect his belongings, according to Mercedes Vinuesa Sebastian, Spain's public health director. Both times, the nurse wore personal protective equipment. Spanish officials said they do not know what went wrong and are investigating. "We are working to verify the exact source of contact to see if all strict protocols were followed," Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato said at a news conference on Monday, according to NBC News. European Union officials have issued a letter to Mato asking for clarification about how the nurse became infected even though all EU member states were required to take measures to avoid transmission. "There is obviously a problem somewhere," European Commission spokesman Fr d ric Vincent said, according to the Guardian. Health workers at the Carlos III Hospital protested on Tuesday, and others have raised concerns that the protective suits used by workers treating Ebola patients at the facility are not adequate. According to the Spanish newspaper El Pais, hospital staff provided photos of protective suits that use latex gloves attached using tape. Hospital staff members told the paper that the protective equipment should have been completely impermeable, but that it was not. The workers also said that the suits did not allow for autonomous breathing. Hospital officials denied that World Health Organization recommendations were not followed in the treatment of both Garcia Viejo and another Spanish priest, 75 year old Miguel Pajares, who died of Ebola after being flown from West Africa to Spain, where he received the experimental drug ZMapp. Exclusive How the world failed to stop the Ebola epidemic "The suits used perfectly meet protocol, as well as the mandatory protection requirements for this disease," said Yolanda Fuentes, the deputy director of Carlos III hospital, according to El Pais. The WHO recommendations detail, in general terms, the types of equipment that are appropriate for treating a patient with hemorrhagic fevers, including Ebola. The WHO also outlines procedures for entering and exiting an infected patient's room, removing protective equipment and decontaminating surfaces inside and outside a patient's room. Failure to follow any of the steps in those procedures could potentially lead to infection. Hospital staff also alleged that waste from the patient's room was removed using an elevator that was shared by all hospital personnel, according to the Guardian. The nurse who contracted Ebola began experiencing symptoms on Sept. 30, five days after Garcia Viejo died. Tests confirmed on Monday that she had contracted Ebola. After treating both Garcia Viejo and Pajares, the woman went on a vacation but remained in Madrid, officials said, according to Reuters. On Tuesday, 22 people who came into contact with the nurse were being monitored, but not isolated, according to Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital. The nurse's husband, who is not showing symptoms, and another health worker who is experiencing diarrhea but not fever, have been hospitalized. Early signs of Ebola infection include fever, diarrhea and headaches. A Spanish man who recently returned from Nigeria has also been hospitalized, though the first test came back negative for Ebola, according to the Associated Press. Officials "even announced plans to euthanize the woman's pet dog" in an effort the contain the virus, the AP reported. Madrid's regional government even got a court order to euthanize and incinerate their pet, "Excalibur," against the couple's objections. The government said available scientific knowledge suggests a risk that the mixed breed dog could transmit the virus to humans, and promised to use "biosecurity" measures to prevent any such transmission. The incident has raised fresh concerns that, despite assurances from global public health officials that Ebola cases can be safely managed in developed countries, sufficient precautions have not been taken. The WHO's European director told Reuters that additional imported cases in Europe are "unavoidable." "Such imported cases and similar events as have happened in Spain will happen also in the future, most likely," said Zsuzsanna Jakab. "It is quite unavoidable ... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around." This post originally cited an AP report that said a Nigerian has been hospitalized in Spain. The AP has updated its reporting to say that the man is Spanish and had recently traveled to Nigeria. This post has been updated as well. RELATED READING U.S. will increase Ebola screenings, but won't impose travel bans Here's what the Ebola epidemic (still) looks like in West Africa Ebola Live chat with Post reporters Wednesday at Noon. Dallas officials send a message of calm about Ebola risk
iStock Thinkstock(MADRID) The Spanish nurse's aide who has contracted Ebola was part of a specialized team that cared for a priest who died of the disease, once changing his diapers and later disposing of his possessions after the priest died, a public health official said. The case marked the first time the disease has been contracted outside of West Africa and has alarmed health workers throughout Europe. The European Union has demanded an explanation from Spain as to how the health worker could have become infected. "Tomorrow morning, we will have an audio conference call of EU's Health Security Committee," said Frederic Vincent, a spokesman for European Health Commission, on Tuesday. "We will all listen very carefully to what the Spanish officials have to tell us on why was the hospital not ready for Ebola patients." The 44 year old patient, who has not been publicly identified, worked as the equivalent of a nurse's aide at Madrid's Carlos III hospital. She was part of a team that treated two Ebola patients who were repatriated from West Africa after contracting the disease. The medical team treated a missionary, Miguel Pajares, 75, who was repatriated home from Liberia in August and died five days later. The same team took care of Mario Garcia Viejo, 69, a Spanish missionary who got infected in Sierra Leone and was flown to Madrid for treatment four days before he died on Sept. 25. The woman had contact with Viejo twice Once when he was still alive and she had to change his diapers, and a second time after he died and she had to take out his sheets, clothing and bodily wastes, public health official said. She went on holiday after Viejo's death, although officials insist she never left Madrid. Officials said the woman wasn't feeling well for a week before she was admitted to the isolation unit. El Mundo daily reported that it was the nurse who asked repeatedly to be tested for Ebola, before it was done on Monday. Since her disease was diagnosed, her husband, who has no sign of disease, and two more people, including a colleague who treated Viejo, are being monitored in the hospital in a bid to try to stop the spread of the deadly virus. In addition, health authorities said they are monitoring more than 50 possible contacts of the nurse's aide. The team has a strict safety protocol in place, which includes double impregnated gowns, gloves, masks and protective eye glasses, according to health officials. "We are investigating how she got contaminated and if protocols were respected," said Rosa Serrano, an official with Spanish health ministry. Staff at the hospital told El Pais daily that the protective gowns they were using did not meet World Health Organization criteria, which require them to be impermeable and have a breathing equipment. Staff also complained about low quality latex gloves. Spain was the first European country to repatriate home infected patients for treatment. Some health professionals said that Spanish hospitals were not well equipped to handle Ebola patients. "For instance, in the U.S. there are 10 hospitals with level 4 isolation and here only Carlos III with level 2 and level 3," said Pedro Martinez of AMYTS, the union representing doctors. Despite the situation in Spain, European Health Commission thinks that a European Ebola epidemic "is very unlikely, and that in some way it could be a lesson for other member states," Vincent said.
The spread of Ebola across Europe is "quite unavoidable", the World Health Organisation has warned as four people were in hospital after a Spanish nurse became the first person known to have contracted the virus outside Africa. WHO European director Zsuzsanna Jakab has said while more cases will spread in Europe, the continent should be well prepared to control the disease. Health officials in Spain today said four people the nurse, her husband and two others were being monitored in hospital in a bid to stem the spread of the virus. "Such imported cases and similar events as have happened in Spain will happen also in the future, most likely," Ms Jakab told Reuters. "It is quite unavoidable ... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around," she said. Ms Jakab said European health workers were most at risk of becoming infected, but added that "the most important thing in our view is that Europe is still at low risk and that the western part of the European region particularly is the best prepared in the world to respond to viral haemorrhagic fevers including Ebola." It has emerged that the nurse, who had helped treat two Spanish missionaries who died after returning from Africa with the disease, first complained of feeling ill a week before she was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday. The 40 year old is understood to have contacted health workers after complaining of a low fever on September 30. She was only given tests for Ebola however when she turned up at hospital with a high fever on Monday, The Telegraph has reported. Spanish Ebola patient, Catholic priest Manuel Garcia Viejo, died after being repatriated from Sierra Leone on 22 September 2014 One of those hospitalised is a health worker who has diarrhoea but no fever. The other is a Spaniard who travelled from Nigeria, said Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital where the infected nurse treated the two Spanish missionaries. Health officials have said 22 people who came into contact with the nurse are also being monitored. They have not been isolated but they are having their temperature taken twice a day to check for signs of infection. The EU has now asked Spain to explain how the nurse contracted the deadly disease, according to an AFP report. The 40 year old nurse, who has not been identified but is said to be in a stable condition, had up to 30 colleagues who also treated the missionaries who died of Ebola at the hospital in Madrid. A spokesman for the European Commission said the case, the first known case of Ebola spreading within a European country, would be discussed at a Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. Officials said they were still investigating how the nurse was infected. She went on holiday after the second of the missionaries she had been caring for died on September 25, although, they stressed, she had not left Madrid. Jonathan Ball, a professor of molecular virology at the University of Nottingham, said the Spanish nurse should not have contracted the deadly disease if appropriate containment and control measures had been taken. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again," he told Reuters. Local media in Spain yesterday reported that staff at the Madrid hospital where the nurse became infected had claimed their protective suits did not meet health and safety requirements though this has yet to be substantiated. Meanwhile, a Norwegian doctor infected with Ebola while working in Sierra Leone has arrived in Norway for treatment. Officials said she was in an isolation ward at Oslo University Hospital.
WASHINGTON Questions were raised Tuesday about the quality of the protective equipment used by the medical team that cared for two Spanish priests who contracted Ebola as three more people were placed in quarantine for possible exposure to the virus. Spain's Health Ministry announced Monday that a nurse at the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid had tested positive for the virus, the first person known to have contracted Ebola outside Africa in the current epidemic. The woman, who is reportedly in her 40s, had helped care for Manuel Garcia Viejo, a 69 year old missionary in Sierra Leone who died of Ebola on Sept. 25 after being evacuated to Spain for treatment. More than 50 people who may have come into contact with the nurse are being monitored in case they develop symptoms. The nurse's husband, who has shown no signs of the deadly disease, was hospitalized as a precaution, Dr. Francisco Arnalich, head of internal medicine at Carlos III, said at a news conference Tuesday. A second nurse who helped care for the priest was placed in quarantine after experiencing diarrhea. However, she does not have a fever, one of the most common signs of Ebola. A Spanish engineer who returned home from Nigeria recently has also been placed in quarantine, but his first test was negative for Ebola, officials said. Staff members held a small protest outside the Madrid hospital Tuesday, complaining that they did not receive sufficient training or the most modern equipment to protect themselves against infection. They said that they used latex gloves secured with adhesive tape and were not issued breathing equipment, El Pais newspaper reported. The hospital's deputy director, Yolanda Fuentes, rejected the claims, saying the gear conformed with safety protocols established by the World Health Organization and the Ministry of Health, the newspaper reported. Health care workers have been among those hardest hit in the current outbreak, which has killed more than 3,400 of the nearly 7,500 suspected and confirmed Ebola patients in West Africa. As of Oct. 1, 382 health care workers were reported to have developed Ebola including 216 people who died of the disease. The virus is spread though contact with the bodily fluids of people who have developed symptoms. A WHO official warned Tuesday that more cases were likely to turn up in Europe. "It is quite unavoidable ... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around," WHO's European director, Zsuzsanna Jakab, said in an interview with the Reuters news agency.
Spanish health authorities reacted forcefully today after a nurse's aide was found to have contracted Ebola, putting her in an isolation unit, quarantining her husband and two other people, and getting a court order to euthanize her dog. The case marked the first time the disease has been contracted outside of west Africa and has alarmed health workers throughout Europe. The European Union has demanded an explanation from Spain as to how the health worker could have become infected. "Tomorrow morning, we will have an audio conference call of EU's Health Security Committee," said Frederic Vincent, a spokesman for European Health Commission. "We will all listen very carefully to what the Spanish officials have to tell us on why was the hospital not ready for Ebola patients." The response by Madrid raised the specter that pets could spread the disease. The city of Madrid got a court order to euthanize and incinerate the woman's dog over her and her husband's objections, according to the Associated Press. The dog is a mixed breed pooch named Excalibur. The government said available scientific knowledge suggests a risk that the dog could transmit the virus to humans. Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a news conference today, "We have not identified this as means of transmission," but declined to comment on the actions by Madrid officials. Texas health commissioner David Lakey, who has said they are monitoring about 50 people who had contact with the Ebola patient in Dallas, said, "We are not monitoring any animals at this time." The Spanish patient, who has not been publicly identified, worked as the equivalent of a nurse's aide at Madrid's Carlos III hospital. She was part of a team that treated two Ebola patients who were repatriated from West Africa after contracting the disease. The medical team treated a missionary Miguel Pajares, 75, who was repatriated home from Liberia in August and died five days later. The same team took care of Mario Garcia Viejo, 69, a Spanish missionary who got infected in Sierra Leone and was flown to Madrid for treatment four days before he died on Sept. 25. Texas Ebola Patient Thomas Eric Duncan Now Getting Experimental Drug What to Know About the Experimental Drug Being Given to the Texas Ebola Patient US Journalist With Ebola Leaves Liberia to Be Treated in Nebraska The woman, 44, had contact with Viejo twice. Once when he was still alive and she had to change his diapers, and a second time after he died and she had to take out his sheets, clothing and bodily wastes, public health official said. She went on holiday after Viejo's death, although officials insist she never left Madrid. Officials said the woman wasn't feeling well for a week before she was admitted to the isolation unit. El Mundo daily reported that it was the nurse who asked repeatedly to be tested for Ebola, before it was done on Monday. Since her disease was diagnosed, her husband, who has no sign of disease, and two more people including a colleague who treated Viejo are being monitored in the hospital in a bid to try to stop the spread of the deadly virus. In addition, health authorities said they are monitoring more than 50 possible contacts of the nurse's aide. The team has a strict safety protocol in place, which includes double impregnated gown, gloves, masks and protective eye glasses, according to health officials.
In August, the first European infected with the Ebola virus in Western Africa was repatriated to Spain, a missionary who had lived for many years in Liberia. It was a medical military operation following high security protocols. He was 75. They took Miguel Pajares to Torrej n de Ardoz air force base near Madrid, and cleared the whole sixth floor of the Carlos III hospital to treat him and put him on the experimental drug ZMapp. But all those resources couldn't save him. He died on the 12th of August. Another missionary, Manuel Garcia Viejo, died on the 25th of September, at the same Madrid hospital, after the 69 year old had been repatriated from Sierra Leone with Ebola. A team of 30 health professional volunteers worked to save the two patients. They took great precautions but not enough. Eleven days after Garcia Viejo's death, Monday, the Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato called the media. Mato said "This evening we identified a case of transmission of the Ebola virus from a patient in our country. We are coodinating our best efforts for the patient, and to guarantee the security of all our citizens." It was one of the volunteers, a 40 year old nurse's aide who helped clean the two missionaries. On the 30th of September she reported her temperature was at 38.6 degrees Celsius and she felt bad. But according to a Madrid regional health service official she was not sent to hospital because she lacked the clinical criteria. Then her fever got worse. It was left for the public health chief to explain. Director General of Public Health Mercedes Vinuesa said "We have to find how this professional was infected. We know she was in Manuel Garcia Viejo's room twice, once before his death, to change a diaper, and once afterwards to clean up. According to our information, she went in with full protective equipment." Many Spaniards want to know why the missionaries were brought back. One woman interviewed outside the hospital said "I think it was harmful to bring them to Spain. Spaniards or not, they had lived abroad for 20 30 years. I think it would have been best to leave them where they were." We spoke with Doctor Marciano S nchez Bayle, a paediatrician, kidney specialist and spokesman for the Public Health Service Defence Federation, in Madrid. Producer Beatriz Beiras asked "In light of what's happened, was it an error to repatriate the two missionaries?" Marciano S nchez Bayle "The way I see it, yes, because a disease has been imported that didn't exist here before, and it was treated in a place that did not meet adequate security conditions, as we've seen." euronews "A health professional catching the Ebola virus in a Spanish hospital with the standing of Carlos III is surprising, both to ordinary people and the scientific community. What's your assessment?" S nchez Bayle "I don't think it's that surprising because there has been an attempt to dismantle the Carlos III Hospital by the Madrid regional health community with the support of the Ministry of Health, and so today it's not what it used to be." euronews "What do you mean, 'dismantle'?" S nchez Bayle "The whole section devoted to infectious illnesses has been closed. The professionals who worked there have been moved to other positions. The laboratory was closed, and so was the intensive care unit. It's just to say that, one way or another, its capacity to take care of illnesses with these characteristics has been most remarkably reduced." euronews "Members of the CSI F public sector workers union told euronews that the maximum level 4 clothing required when treating the Ebola patients was not always used. Have you heard about these allegations?" S nchez Bayle "Yes, there have been numerous complaints, in the sense that there was little information and training of health professionals involved in caring for the Ebola patients, and people also said that the means for guaranteeing protection were insufficient or not of the required quality." euronews "There have been lots of questions about the procedure followed for the nurse's aide from the time she first felt symptoms. For example, didn't they wait too long before isolating her?" S nchez Bayle "Clearly, she should have been quarantined right away, and the fact she moved around freely in the city of Madrid for several days, while she was carrying the illness, that adds more risks. They have to be considered important." euronews "A lot of people don't know how the Ebola virus is spread. Can you tell us, briefly?" S nchez Bayle "The virus is contagious only when there is direct contact with the bodily fluids of the sick, such as saliva, sweat, blood, urine and semen. Transmission cannot be airborne." euronews "How do you rate the Health Ministry's management of this crisis?" S nchez Bayle "I think what is happening is very serious. I think the people in charge should resign immediately. They should guarantee that sufficiently qualified and responsible people are given the job of handling the problem. That is not currently the case."
Hospitals on standby as health officials admit 'real risk' Ebola could reach British shores and Prime Minister convenes emergency Cobra committee to discuss the threat Major NHS hospitals across the country have been put on standby, as health officials warn of a "real risk" that the deadly Ebola virus could spread to Britain. The Prime Minister will convene a meeting of the Government's Cobra emergency committee on Wednesday morning to discuss the growing threat to the UK from the spread of Ebola. It comes after a Spanish nurse became the first person to contract the disease outside Africa, and as the United States drew up plans to screen arrivals for the virus. On Tuesday, public health officials in this country ruled out such a move. Four major NHS hospitals in England have now been identified as units to take patients with Ebola if the need arises. Currently, just one unit has been established, in the Royal Free Hospital in north London, which treated William Pooley, a British nurse who contracted the virus in Sierra Leone in August. Royal Liverpool University Hospital NHS foundation trust, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals Foundation trust and Sheffield Teaching Hospitals foundation trust have now been identified as hospitals which could take Ebola patients if the virus reaches the UK. Thirty medical staff in Madrid are now being monitored for signs of the virus, with four people, including the nurse's husband, placed in quarantine. Today, David Cameron will today chair an emergency meeting in Whitehall to discuss the growing threat to the UK. It comes after the World Health Organisation said more cases in Europe are now "quite unavoidable". Ministers yesterday announced plans to send a humanitarian operation out to west Africa, to treat medics with the disease. Latest forecasts from US scientists warn of a 50 per cent chance that the virus could reach British shores within three weeks. Under NHS contingency plans, protective equipment will be sent to hospitals in Sheffield, Newcastle and Liverpool, if the need arises. Operational guidance from NHS England dated last month warns that there are only two high level containment beds available in the country both in the Royal Free Hospital with no isolation units available at all in Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland. Universities and schools have also been sent advice warning them to look out for pupils showing signs of fever who have travelled from West Africa. The unprecedented Ebola outbreak this year has killed more than 3,400 people in Africa, and become an increasing concern across the rest of the world. Earlier this week President Barack Obama indicated that the US now plans to screen incoming air passengers for the virus. But Public Health England (PHE) said it does not intend to introduce screening for travellers from West Africa, insisting such efforts would be impractical, and mean checks on "huge numbers of low risk people". Officials said if a case of Ebola was reported in the UK, the affected person would be isolated and protective measures would be implemented. PHE said the overall chance of the virus entering Britain remained "low" and the country has "robust, well developed and well tested NHS systems for managing unusual infectious diseases". However officials described a "real risk" the disease could reach British shores, while British virologists said the arrival of the virus now appeared "inevitable". On Tuesday the European Commission launched an investigation into the actions of the Spanish authorities, and why it was that the Spanish nurse, treating repatriated Ebola patients, was not diagnosed and placed in isolation until a week after she began feeling unwell. The Spanish nurse, 44, contracted the virus after helping to treat two repatriated priests who both died. She reportedly contacted doctors to say she was suffering from a fever and fatigue on September 30, but did not present herself to her local hospital for more than one week. Dr Nick Beeching, a senior lecturer at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, said "With the increasingly likelihood of somebody turning up in the UK we have been put on alert in Liverpool and have been making sure the plans are in place." Ben Neuman, a virologist at the University of Reading said "If the outbreak goes on indefinitely, Ebola will eventually come to the UK. "When and exactly how is a tough call. That is an argument for fighting Ebola as hard as possible, right now. Fight it there, or we will eventually have to fight it here." Dr Brian McCloskey, director of global health at PHE, said "UK hospitals have a proven record of dealing with imported infectious diseases. If an Ebola case is repatriated to, or detected in, the UK they would receive appropriate treatment in an isolation unit, with all appropriate protocols promptly activated." International Development Secretary Justine Greening said the Government was continuing to keep the issue of tighter travel restrictions under review following the Spanish case of Ebola. "It doesn't change the assessment of the risk to the UK," she said. "But what it does show is why we're right to be working with governments as we are in Sierra Leone to help them combat this disease where it's spreading so rapidly now." Army personnel from 22 Field Hospital, normally based in York, are expected to send a humanitarian operation to west Africa within the next few weeks. They will staff a field hospital set up specifically to treat medics who have caught the disease. Minister for the Armed Forces, Mark Francois, said "The Ebola virus represents a global threat to public health and we will not stand idly by." A Downing Street spokesman said "As part of the Government's ongoing efforts to combat the outbreak of Ebola in West Africa, the Prime Minister will chair this week's Cobr meeting. This is part of an ongoing series of Cobr meetings to coordinate the UK response that started in late July and has been in the diary for some time." Ahead of the meeting, Mr Cameron last night called the President of Sierra Leone to be updated on their situation, and discussed the use of 125m UK aid, including support for 700 extra beds. A spokesman for the Department of Health said "We are aware of the situation in Spain and are monitoring it closely. "This is a reminder that we must support healthcare workers in maintaining the most rigorous infection control procedures when dealing with Ebola. The NHS has tried and tested systems for managing infectious diseases, and we continue to inform clinicians about the signs of Ebola, the need for vigilance and the action to take if they have cause for concern about a particular patient." Ebola Justine Greening MP plays down risk to UK
BARCELONA, Spain Spain's government came under heavy criticism Tuesday as it dealt with the repercussions of Western Europe's first Ebola case, quarantining three more people and monitoring dozens who had come into contact with an infected nurse. Health care workers, who have been sparring with the government over cutbacks, said they had not received proper training or equipment to handle an Ebola case. The European Commission, the executive arm of the European Union, asked for an explanation, according to news reports. And some opposition politicians called for the health minister, Ana Mato, to resign. At a news conference in Madrid, officials insisted that they had taken all appropriate measures to prevent the spread of the virus. But in a sign of the government's unease with the possible political consequences, a lower ranking official, Mar a Mercedes Vinuesa, director of public health, went before Parliament on Tuesday to answer questions, not Ms. Mato. The infected nurse, who has not been identified, was described as being in stable condition. Her husband and two other people were quarantined, and monitoring was extended to about 50 people who were believed to have come into contact with her. Health officials have said that the nurse became infected while treating a missionary, Manuel Garc a Viejo, who died in the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid on Sept. 25, after being repatriated from Sierra Leone. Officials said the nurse went on vacation the day after he died, then told a medical center that she had a fever of about 100 degrees on Sept. 30. She was hospitalized only on Monday, initially in another establishment without any unit specifically for handling diseases like Ebola.. The nurse's husband has shown no signs of having the disease but was isolated as a precaution, said Dr. Francisco Arnalich, head of internal medicine at the hospital. Reached by phone in his hospital ward, the nurse's husband told the newspaper El Mundo that the couple had canceled vacation plans after he had an accident at work, and that his wife had decided to spend a few days at her mother's, instead. He did not specify the mother's location. He said that he felt fine and that he was confident his own health was evolving "favorably." But he said he was angered to hear that the medical authorities were recommending, as a precaution, that their dog be euthanized. The husband, identified by the newspaper as Javier, said his wife, identified as Teresa, had told him that she followed all the safety instructions set by the hospital and did not know how she could have become infected. The case is worrisome because Spain is a developed country that is expected to have the rigorous infection control protocols needed to fight the spread of Ebola. A second nurse who also treated the missionary was put under quarantine after reporting diarrhea, but she did not have a fever, the most common early symptom of Ebola, health officials said. A Nigerian man who recently arrived in Spain is also under quarantine but tested negative for Ebola, according to Spanish health authorities. A second test is to be carried out Wednesday. Opposition politicians said Tuesday that Ms. Mato, the health minister, needed to explain any safety lapse, while some called for her immediate removal. Caridad Garc a lvarez, a lawmaker from the United Left party, said on Twitter that Ms. Mato should resign, saying she had ignored warnings from health workers about inadequate safety measures. Ms. Vinuesa told Parliament that the authorities were drawing up a list of all the people who might have come into contact with the infected nurse. She said Spain had different treatments for Ebola, but offered no further details. Amid recent tensions between Spanish health care workers and the government over spending cuts in the health sector, representatives of medical unions were quoted on Spanish news media websites as saying that austerity measures had left health workers poorly trained and ill equipped to handle an Ebola case. Carlos III Hospital was specifically selected by Spain to welcome repatriated Ebola patients, and Yolanda Fuentes, a deputy director of the hospital, said Monday that the protective suits worn by health workers "comply perfectly with the protocol and the required protective measures for this disease." The European Commission wrote to the government in Madrid requesting an explanation of how the nurse was infected, Agence France Presse reported, quoting Fr d ric Vincent, a spokesman for the commission. A European health safety committee is set to meet on Wednesday to review the situation. ,Mr. Vincent said it was "highly improbable" that the virus would spread further across Europe. As an assistant nurse, the woman who became infected had only twice entered the room of the missionary who died of Ebola, including once after his death, according to Antonio Alemany, a health official from the regional government of Madrid. The nurse, who is believed to be in her 40s, came into contact with 22 other people, mostly medical staff members in a hospital in Alcorc n, on the outskirts of Madrid, where she was initially treated on Monday before being transferred to Carlos III Hospital shortly after midnight, according to Rafael P rez Santamarina, the general manager of the La Paz hospital, a larger establishment that oversees the Carlos III hospital. Mr. P rez Santamarina told reporters that the nurse was being treated on Tuesday using antibodies from other patients who had survived the disease.
MOSCOW, October 7 (RIA Novosti) One of the four patients in Spain, suspected of being infected with Ebola virus, has been tested negative, Reuters reported Tuesday. A nurse at a hospital in Madrid tested positive after taking part in a treatment of Spanish priest Manuel Garc a Viejo, who became infected with the Ebola virus, while serving at a Sierra Leone hospital and died in a Madrid hospital on September 25. This was the first Ebola case in Europe during the current outbreak. Three more people have been hospitalized with the similar symptoms, including another female health worker. On Tuesday, it was revealed that her test results were negative. The European Commission has demanded from Spain to explain the first case of Ebola infection in Europe. The meeting of a special expert commission is scheduled for Wednesday. The worst Ebola outbreak in history started in February in Guinea and quickly spread to Liberia, Sierra Leone, Senegal and Nigeria. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the death toll from the Ebola epidemic has surpassed 3,400, with 7470 infected. There is no officially approved medication for the disease. However, several countries, including Russia, the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada and Japan, are currently working on vaccines. Earlier in August, first humans were treated for the first time with the experimental ZMapp serum. Two US citizens and two doctors from Nigeria and Uganda showed signs of improvement, following the treatment. Spanish priest Pajares and Liberian doctor Abraham Borbor did not survive.
Despite rigorous checks and protocols, a nursing assistant in Madrid still contracted the disease from a sick patient When two Spanish missionaries working in Sierra Leone contracted Ebola and were evacuated to Madrid's Carlos III hospital, city officials and the country's health minister assured a nervous public that the hospital's strict protocols would prevent transmission of the virus to health workers and other patients. But something went wrong. A 40 year old nursing assistant has become the first person to contract the disease outside of Africa after helping care for one of the missionaries, Manuel Garc a Viejo, before his death on Sept. 25. The nurse, who has not been named by the hospital, was infected despite being fully outfitted with two layers of protective gear on the two occasions she helped treat him. She also reported to the hospital that she was suffering from a fever a full week before she was admitted to a highly secure isolation ward early Tuesday morning. At this point no one knows exactly where a mistake was made. But the fact that the hospital's rigorous checks couldn't prevent the nursing assistant from becoming sick raises the question is Europe less prepared for Ebola than it thinks? "It came as a true surprise, and a stunning one," says M ximo Gonz lez Jurado, president of the General Nursing Council (CGE), which represents Spain's nurses. "We thought we were well prepared, and that the risk even if it can't be zero was minimal. After all, we have very good, very modern health care. Spain has the seventh best health care system in the world." At Hospital Carlos III, the 30 health workers who had contact with the infected missionaries donned double layers of head to toe protective gear each time they entered the isolation room where the patients were housed. They were also required to take their own temperatures twice daily during the 21 day incubation period for the disease. It was through that protocol that the infected nurse first reported on Sept. 30th that she had a temperature of 38.6 C (101.5 F). For reasons that are still unclear possibly because the fever was relatively low, but perhaps because in its early stages, Ebola's viral count can be too low for detection the disease was ruled out. Like Thomas Eric Duncan, the visiting Liberian who presented himself at a Dallas hospital on Sept. 25, the nurse was sent home. On vacation from work, she stayed there until an ordinary ambulance brought her to her neighborhood hospital on Oct. 6 with a fever that was by then raging. "It would have been better if she had entered the hospital on the 30th," Fernando Sim n, emergencies coordinator for the Health Ministry, admitted to the press. But that possible mistake is not the only one under scrutiny. In August, a male nurse at Hospital La Paz, which is affiliated with Carlos III, wrote an anonymous post for the blog of the Madrid Association of Independent Nursing, in which he complained that the staff was not sufficiently trained in Ebola protocols, and that it had not performed any simulations of Ebola treatment by the time the two missionaries arrived. It's a complaint repeated by Gonz lez, the nursing council's president. "In the case of avian influenza A, the government formed a crisis cabinet, there was exhaustive information available to the public and complete training for health professionals," he said. "That was not the case with Ebola. According to the information we have, the staff were not receiving the kind of in depth training they should have." Those who cared for the two missionaries were not isolated, a protocol that has since changed with the nurse's case. "We don't do many simulations in Spain, and we need to, we need to professionalize this more," says Dr. Antoni Trilla, epidemiologist at the Hospital Clinic of the University of Barcelona. "It's only through achieving real verisimilitude that you discover the flaws in your protocols." He should know his hospital has had two Ebola scares, both of which turned out to be negative. But the cases enabled the hospital to improve, for example, its procedure for one of the most dangerous moments of care removing protective gear after contact with the infected. But even improved training has its limits, especially for a disease so highly infectious as Ebola. "What we know from the situation of healthcare workers in west Africa is that it is sometimes actually people who appear to have taken all the precautions that fall ill," says David Moore, Professor of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine at the London School of Hygiene Tropical Medicine."They may have dropped their guard when removing protective gear or in disposing of a dead body. In west Africa, they learnt that lesson the painful way." Caregivers in Europe are likely to learn that lesson too. "It's unavoidable that there will be other cases like this," says Zsuzsanna Jakab, European regional director for the World Health Organization. "But Europe and especially the European Union is well prepared. I would even say it's the best prepared region." It may need to be. So long as air travel continues to and from the three countries in west Africa worst affected by the disease, the risk of further outbreaks remains high. With nearly 30 of the air passengers leaving Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone flying to Europe, the risk of more cases appearing in Europe is real and growing. A study published in the scientific journal PLoS on Oct. 6 put the risk of Ebola being imported to France by October 24 at 75 and to the UK at 50 . The results were based on levels of air traffic. It's healthcare workers like the Spanish nursing assistant who will likely be worst affected. The unnamed woman was in a stable condition as of Tuesday evening, and is receiving immunotherapy in the form of a serum made from the blood of an Ebola patient who recovered. Three people, including the nurse's husband, have now been placed in quarantine, with medical staff who treated her under observation, and contact tracing of friends and family. But even if she remains an isolated case, others are sure to follow. "We're never going to see this become an epidemic among the general public in Europe," says Dr. Trilla. "But there is definitely a risk for medical personnel. They're the ones I worry about." With reporting by Naina Bajekal London
European health chiefs demand explanation as to how nurse in high security Ebola treatment ward ended up infected Spanish officials were facing mounting criticism on Tuesday over their handling of Europe's first Ebola outbreak. They admitted they had still not worked out how a nurse became infected with the virus while working at a Madrid hospital. The European Commission has demanded an urgent explanation from the Spanish authorities of how the infection happened in what was supposed to be a high security treatment ward. Spain's health ministry has now put more than 50 people under observation for signs of infection. The infected nurse was named as Maria Teresa Romero Ramos, 44, who is believed to have become infected while treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, an elderly Spanish missionary repatriated to Madrid from Sierra Leone last month. Three other people, including her husband, were placed in quarantine on Tuesday, while a further 52 health workers have been put under observation by the health authorities. Related Articles British fianc e of cameraman with Ebola tells of anguish at being unable to touch him 07 Oct 2014 US plan more airport screenings for Ebola 06 Oct 2014 British American contracted Ebola 'cleaning infected car' 06 Oct 2014 British American TV cameraman contracts Ebola in Liberia 03 Oct 2014 Girlfriend of Ebola victim 'We are depending on God to save our lives' 03 Oct 2014 First case of Ebola diagnosed in US 30 Sep 2014 The 44 year old nurse was part of the medical team that treated Manuel Garcia Viejo (picturted) on his return to Spain. PHOTO REUTERS While Spanish officials tried to quell public panic, insisting that "all necessary measures were in place to ensure public health", concerns remained about their failure to identify exactly how Ms Romero had become infected. Like other staff at specialist isolation unit of Madrid's Carlos III hospital, she had been drilled in how to use protective clothing when treating patients, and had apparently only visited Mr Garcia's room twice, once to change his medical nappy and once to clear the room after his death on September 25. "We are complying with the established procedure but we are revising all protocols, including those inside the hospital and those outside," said Rafael Perez Santamarina, a senior health official, admitting that the source of the infection was still unknown. "When we finish the investigation, we will be able to say." Javier Limon, the husband of the infected nurse, insisted that his wife had stringently "followed regulations" while caring for the missionary priests repatriated with the illness. "She did everything she was told to, and at no time was she concerned that she could have been infected," he told Spain's El Mundo newspaper in a telephone interview from the hospital isolation ward where he has been quarantined. Staff at the hospital, meanwhile, staged a public protest, complaining that emergency measures and training on how to look after Mr Garcia and another Ebola infected priest had not been adequate. They said they had been issued with substandard overalls which were not entirely impermeable, and that they should also have been given breathing apparatus, although medical experts say the latter is not considered essential as Ebola is not airborne. Health workers attend a protest outside La Paz Hospital in Madrid. PHOTO REUTERS Questions have also been raised as to why it took so long to isolate the nurse after she began to feel unwell on September 30. She reportedly contacted health workers to tell them she was suffering from a low fever and fatigue, explaining that she had assisted in the care of the missionaries. But it was not until she presented herself at her local hospital with a high fever early on Monday that she was finally admitted and tested positive to the deadly haemorrhagic virus. Spanish officials also took the extra precaution of taking away her pet dog to be put down, amid concerns that the dog could have acted as a carrier of the virus. Ms Romero is the first person to have contracted Ebola outside of west Africa, where the virus has now claimed nearly 3,500 lives. The outbreak, which began in Guinea in December, has spread mainly to neighbouring Liberia and Sierra Leone, but isolated cases have also been reported in Nigeria, Senegal and last week also in the US, where a man tested positive after flying to Texas from Liberia. Thomas Eric Duncan has been in critical condition at a Dallas hospital since Saturday, and has been put on a kidney dialysis machine. Spain's opposition parties called for the resignation of Ana Mato, the health minister of Spain's conservative government over her handling of the crisis. A European public health safety committee will also meet on Wednesday to review the situation, amid fears that the Madrid outbreak could spread to other countries. Meanwhile, Zsuzsanna Jakab, the director of the World Health Organisation, predicted that further outbreaks would almost Ebola virus would almost inevitably take place in Europe, given the extensive air links between the European capitals and west Africa. "Such imported cases and similar events as have happened in Spain will happen also in the future, most likely," Ms Jakab said. "It is quite unavoidable ... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around," she said. Passengers travelling from Ebola infected nations in west Africa currently undergo temperature checks before boarding flights, with anyone registering a thermometer reading of 38C banned from boarding. But given that the virus has an incubation period of up to three weeks, it is impossible to screen with complete effectiveness. While some airlines have suspended direct flights to infected countries, such as British Airways, United Nations health chiefs have lobbied for others to remain in operation, arguing that a complete ban on international air travel would hamper the international aid effort. Despite the Spanish case, Ms Jakab said a widespread outbreak in Europe was unlikely because of the high standard of health services and public sanitation. "The most important thing in our view is that Europe is still at low risk, and the Western part of the European region particularly is the best prepared in the world to respond to viral haemorrhagic fevers," she said. She added that she saw no reason yet for screening at Europe's borders of travellers coming from the affected countries in West Africa, despite plans for such measures in the US.
The spread of Ebola across Europe is "quite unavoidable", the World Health Organisation has warned as four people were in hospital after a Spanish nurse became the first person known to have contracted the virus outside Africa. WHO European director Zsuzsanna Jakab has said while more cases will spread in Europe, the continent should be well prepared to control the disease. Health officials in Spain today said four people the nurse, her husband and two others were being monitored in hospital in a bid to stem the spread of the virus. "Such imported cases and similar events as have happened in Spain will happen also in the future, most likely," Ms Jakab told Reuters. "It is quite unavoidable ... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around," she said. Ms Jakab said European health workers were most at risk of becoming infected, but added that "the most important thing in our view is that Europe is still at low risk and that the western part of the European region particularly is the best prepared in the world to respond to viral haemorrhagic fevers including Ebola." It has emerged that the nurse, who had helped treat two Spanish missionaries who died after returning from Africa with the disease, first complained of feeling ill a week before she was diagnosed with Ebola on Monday. The 40 year old is understood to have contacted health workers after complaining of a low fever on September 30. She was only given tests for Ebola however when she turned up at hospital with a high fever on Monday. One of those hospitalised is a health worker who has diarrhoea but no fever. The other is a Spaniard who travelled from Nigeria, said Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital where the infected nurse treated the two Spanish missionaries. Health officials have said 22 people who came into contact with the nurse are also being monitored. They have not been isolated but they are having their temperature taken twice a day to check for signs of infection. The EU has now asked Spain to explain how the nurse contracted the deadly disease, according to an AFP report. The 40 year old nurse, who has not been identified but is said to be in a stable condition, had up to 30 colleagues who also treated the missionaries who died of Ebola at the hospital in Madrid. A spokesman for the European Commission said the case, the first known case of Ebola spreading within a European country, would be discussed at a Health Security Committee meeting on Wednesday. "The priority remains to find out what actually happened," he said. Officials said they were still investigating how the nurse was infected. She went on holiday after the second of the missionaries she had been caring for died on September 25, although, they stressed, she had not left Madrid. Jonathan Ball, a professor of molecular virology at the University of Nottingham, said the Spanish nurse should not have contracted the deadly disease if appropriate containment and control measures had been taken. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again," he told Reuters. Local media in Spain yesterday reported that staff at the Madrid hospital where the nurse became infected had claimed their protective suits did not meet health and safety requirements though this has yet to be substantiated. Meanwhile, a Norwegian doctor infected with Ebola while working in Sierra Leone has arrived in Norway for treatment. Officials said she was in an isolation ward at Oslo University Hospital.
An ambulance carrying a Spanish nurse infected with Ebola arrives at the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid early October 7, 2014 in this still image from video. (Reuters Reuters TV) Health officials in Madrid say three more people are in the hospital on suspicion of contracting Ebola. The news comes a day after a nurse who treated two Ebola patients at a city hospital became infected with the disease. One has tested negative. The nurse is now being treated with a drip using antibodies from those previously infected with the virus, Reuters reports. Approximately 22 people who have been in contact with the woman, dubbed by media the "Spanish Ebola nurse," have been identified and are being monitored, Madrid health officials told reporters Tuesday. The officials added that the hospitalized include the nurse's husband, another health worker and a traveler who had spent time in one of the affected West African countries. One of the hospitalized the female health worker was reported to have tested negative for Ebola late on Tuesday, according to a Reuters health source in Spain. She had displayed only one potential symptom diarrhea but was not running a fever. Spain's Public Health director, Mercedes Vinuesa, told parliament that authorities were compiling a list of everyone who had come in contact with the nurse so that they could be monitored, AP reports. Vinuesa said Spain had several treatments available and was employing them Monday. The unidentified nurse is reportedly in stable condition. The 44 year old woman is the first known person to have become infected with Ebola outside of Africa during the current outbreak. Other cases in Spain and recently, the US involved individuals contracting the disease while in Africa and then traveling back to their home countries.The nurse had reportedly helped treat a Spanish missionary and a Spanish priest, both of whom came down with the virus while in West Africa and later died after returning to Spain. There is currently no proven known cure or human safe vaccine for Ebola, which is spread via bodily fluids. Initial symptoms of fever and sore throat develop into vomiting, diarrhea and profuse internal and external bleeding. Victims may die of multiple organ failure within days of first contact, with some strains killing up to 90 percent of sufferers. The latest outbreak first struck the West African state of Guiana in December 2013. World Health Organization (WHO) officials, however, did not become aware the disease was raging in the country's south until March 23, 2014. It has since spread to neighboring Senegal, Liberia and Sierra Leone and Nigeria. Due to a rapid response by authorities in Nigeria and Senegal, infections in both states combined were kept below two dozen. Apart from Spain, the United States is the only other non African country to register a case of Ebola. On September 20, an infected man traveling from Liberia arrived in Dallas, Texas. He reportedly started exhibiting symptoms of the disease 4 days later. US health officials are currently monitoring 10 quarantined people who had contact with the man, who remains in critical condition. The WHO has reported a total of 7,493 Ebola infections worldwide. At least 3,439 people are estimated to have died after contracting the disease. In September, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention predicted that 1.4 million people could contract Ebola by the end of January barring drastic attempts to head off the spread of infection. Spanish authorities have come under increasing pressure to explain how the disease was able to spread in one of their hospitals. While they say all proper procedures were followed while providing care to the deceased missionaries, reports to the contrary have surfaced. According to The Guardian, staff at the hospital said waste from the rooms of both patients had been carried out in the same elevator used by all personnel. The hospital was also reportedly not evacuated when the second patient, Garc a Viejo, was taken in to receive treatment. Union workers also accused the government of providing hospital staff with inadequate protective clothing. Some Spanish health workers' representatives said the situation should prompt an overhaul of procedures and facilities used to treat those afflicted with the virus. "Something went wrong," M ximo Gonzalez Jurado, head of Spain's General Nursing Council, told Spanish news agency EFE. "They need to establish if the protocol is correct or not correct so that a case like this, that never should have happened, doesn't happen again."
One of the scientists who discovered Ebola said Tuesday he was not surprised a Spanish nurse contracted the deadly virus, stressing it was impossible to be too careful when dealing with the disease. "This should be a lesson for everybody that you can't overreact. You can't overprotect," Peter Piot said after tests confirmed a 40 year old nurse at a Madrid hospital had become the first person to contract Ebola outside Africa. "Dealing with patients with Ebola .. is very risky business, and the slightest mistake can be fatal," said the Belgian scientist who co discovered the Ebola virus in 1976. "It's better to be accused of overreacting than to not take all the measures," he told reporters in Geneva. Piot was in the Swiss city to head a World Health Organization hosted expert review of the science behind the global response to the ongoing outbreak by far the deadliest on record. Following the teleconference with 15 experts from around the world, he said he was "not surprised" that a nurse had been infected in a European hospital despite the best efforts to avoid transmission. The infected nurse cared for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus after being flown home from west Africa, sparking questions about how safety procedures were applied. News of her infection also sparked renewed questions about Madrid's decision to repatriate infected missionaries from Africa. Critics said Spanish hospitals were not equipped to deal with Ebola. Piot, a professor at the London School of Health and Tropical Medicine, agreed it was risky to "import someone with Ebola" to a place with no experience of the virus or with using the protective equipment. He noted that even two doctors with the Doctors Without Borders (MSF) charity had been infected, despite "draconian discipline". "A dangerous moment is when you undress. When you come out of the isolation unit, you take off your protective gear and you're full of sweat, and you may take off your glasses and do like this," he explained, rubbing his eye. "And that would be the end." To ensure the safety of people working with Ebola patients, Piot stressed the need for very strict discipline, with basically "police" watching over them as they undress, making sure they make no missteps. "That discipline is necessary. That's illustrated by the nurse in Madrid," he said. But while Ebola poses a threat to health care workers around the world, Piot said there was "no risk that I see for outbreaks" in developed countries like the one that has killed 3,439 people in west Africa, according to the latest WHO toll. He warned that the few cases surfacing in Europe and the United States should not remove the focus from the most affected countries, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. "The only way to prevent the popping up of Ebola patients and maybe even outbreaks (elsewhere in the world) is to bring the epidemic under control in west Africa," he said.
MADRID Fears grew Tuesday that the Ebola epidemic was spreading after three more people were isolated in Spain following the infection of a nurse in a Madrid hospital. The EU demanded answers about how the disease could have spread in Spain's most specialist unit treating Ebola where the nurse cared for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus after being flown home from West Africa. Tests confirmed that the 40 year old nurse is the first person to contract the virus outside Africa. One of the nurse's colleagues, who has been suffering from diarrhea, has also been taken in for observation. The infected nurse began to feel ill on Sept. 30 while on leave after treating the two priests in the hospital's isolation unit. But she did not go to hospital until Sunday five days later complaining of a fever, government officials said. Health officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with, and were monitoring 30 people including co workers for Ebola symptoms. The infection also sparked questions about how safety procedures were applied when treating the two missionaries. "People are freaked out," a cardiologist at the hospital said. "We cannot understand how someone who was wearing a double protection suit and two pairs of gloves could have been contaminated." She claimed Spain was not up to dealing with the hemorrhagic fever and questioned the decision to repatriate the missionaries. The nurse had treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who was infected with Ebola in Liberia and died on Aug. 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on Sept. 25. The nurse is believed to have contracted the virus six weeks later while caring for Garcia Viejo. Officials said she visited his room twice, once to clean him and then to collect material after his death. The team that cared for the missionaries was closely monitored, they said. The European Commission has written to the Spanish Health Ministry demanding an explanation, a Brussels spokesman said. Elena Moral, leader of the CSIF AGCM public workers' union, told Spanish public radio "The precautionary measures that should have been taken were not effective. The necessary training was not given and we must find out who was responsible." The head of primary health care for the Madrid region, Antonio Alemany, told a news conference that the nurse was in a stable condition but still had a fever. News of her infection sparked renewed questions about Madrid's decision to repatriate infected missionaries from Africa. Critics said Spanish hospitals were not equipped to deal with Ebola. "We are working to see if all the protocols which were established were strictly followed," Health Minister Ana Mato said. The Ebola virus causes fever, muscle pain, vomiting, diarrhea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. Ebola has caused 3,439 deaths out of 7,478 cases across five West African nations according to the latest WHO tally.
Despite being described by Spain's public health director as "a national jewel," the head of Spain's Nursing Council warns "something went wrong" in the health care system's protocols . As RT reports, Spanish health officials have 4 patients interned including infected initial nurse, her husband, and a 2nd nurse (male). Furthermore, 22 more possible Ebola cases are under surveillance having had direct contact with the infected nurse during her vacation after being infected (officials have said they 'don't know' how she became infected with the deadly virus). Images within the hospital show "irregularities" and make shift isolation units and an insider account said "I do not want to create social alarm, but explain what is still a reality everyday for a few months of nursing staff at the ICU.". One researcher noted "air traffic is the driver.," and added ominously, "it's just a matter of who gets lucky and who gets unlucky." As RT reports, Health officials in Madrid say three more people are in the hospital on suspicion of contracting Ebola. The news comes a day after a nurse who treated two Ebola patients at a city hospital became infected with the disease. The nurse is now being treated with a drip using antibodies from those previously infected with the virus, Reuters reports. Approximately 22 contacts of the woman, often referred to as the 'Spanish Ebola nurse,' have been identified and are being monitored, Madrid health officials told a press conference on Tuesday. The officials added that the hospitalized include the nurse's husband, another health worker and a traveler who had spent time in one of he affected West African countries. Spanish authorities are struggling to explain the infection, as The Daily Mail reports "At the moment we are investigating the way in which the professional was infected," said Antonio Alemany, the head of Madrid's primary health care services. "We don't know yet what failed," he was quoted by the Guardian as saying. "We're investigating the mechanism of infection." Mercedes Vinuesa, the head of Spain's public health service, told parliament today that the nurse's husband had been placed in quarantine. And, as RT reports, in a similar vein to Dallas, it appears local hospitals were anything but prepared for this... Spanish authorities have come under increasing pressure to explain how the disease was able to spread in their hopital. While they say all proper protocols and procedure were followed while providing care to the deceased missionaries, reports to the contrary have surfaced. According to the Guardian, staff at the hospital said waste from the rooms of both patients had been carried out in the same elevator used by all personnel. The hospital was also reportedly not evacuated when the second patient, Garc a Viejo, was taken in to receive treatment. Union workers also accused the government of providing hospital staff with adequate hazmat suits. Some Spanish medical worker representatives said the situation should prompt an overhaul of the procedures and facilities used to treat those afflicted with the virus. "Something went wrong," M ximo Gonzalez Jurado, head of Spain's General Nursing Council, told Spanish news agency EFE. "They need to establish if the protocol is correct or not correct so that a case like this, that never should have happened, doesn't happen again." "Air traffic is the driver," warns Professor Alessandro Vespignani of Northeastern University in Boston...predicting where the virus will spread... There is a 50 per cent chance a traveller carrying the disease could touch down in the UK by October 24, a team of U.S. researchers have predicted. Using Ebola spread patterns and airline traffic data they have calculated the odds of the virus spreading across the world. They estimate there is a 75 per cent chance Ebola will reach French shores by October 24. And Belgium has a 40 per cent chance of seeing the disease arrive on its territory, while Spain and Switzerland have lower risks of 14 per cent each. 'It's just a matter of who gets lucky and who gets unlucky." An insider whistle blows on the weakness in Spanish anti Ebola protocls (via Google Translate) I am a nurse in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of the Hospital La Paz. The reason for addressing you.'s To inform the public the facts that have happened recently regarding the "Crisis of the Ebola virus" opinion. Do not want to create social alarm, but tell what is still a reality in everyday for a few months of nursing staff the ICU among which I include ago. Since the hospital was named La Paz as a reference center for the diagnosis and treatment of HIV infection in April 2014, the staff has been showing its disconfor to that measure and irregularities have been committing the direction of nursing the hospital as a whole. (See attachment Notification Judge). These irregularities summarize, focus on that The hospital does not have adequate infrastructure to enter patients affected with this type of disease (the famous isolation rooms with negative pressure). The original protocols of the Ministry of Health were modified to fit like the gaps that had the hospital If you do not have "negative pressure" we say "as far as is demonstrated airborne transmission is not necessary." General (modified or not) protocols are not handed to staff for knowledge, nor were exposed at various meetings with management nursing. As ICU care were demanding the implementation of specific protocols UCI (Today still not exist or at least personnel have not arrived) Staff training requires the completion of courses and training to work in situations like this. The Department of Preventive Medicine Hospital offers two informative talks (45 minutes) of such as personal protective equipment required. In those talks and the inexperience of the same staff that taught, costumes torn apart, replaced the shims for plastic bags, there were no complete SCUBA and coming to say more or less I had to do a hack to cover his face with masking tape. Without being solved any of these issues by the Department of the hospital, you will hanging out and communicating to staff that will be the Hospital of the defense "G mez Ulla" who takes these emergencies but as it is in the process of reform to create appropriate facilities, until the month of October will remain referral hospital. ... Finally only remains to emphasize that in all this there is a lot of improvisation and a lot of reckless attitude of those who truly, really ... NOT going to be ahead of the virus at him in the face. Listen to those who are on the front line have something to say. Un contained...
The first Ebola transmission case outside of Africa, involving a Spanish nurse who was treating an infected priest, has renewed concerns over the repatriation of those who become stricken with the deadly virus in West Africa. Major questions remain as to how, exactly, the nurse contracted the disease after the Spanish priest was brought home from Sierra Leone for treatment. Health workers protested Tuesday as reports emerged that nurses in the unit had used tape to seal their latex gloves and that their protective suits weren't impermeable. In the absence of answers, the case in Spain underscores the dangers of caring for Ebola patients, even in developed countries. "We are taking this as an alert that we need to redouble our efforts to ensure U.S. healthcare facilities are ready to safely manage patients with Ebola," Abbigail Tumpey, spokeswoman for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said via e mail on Tuesday. The CDC, she noted, will host training sessions in Alabama this week to teach West Africa bound health care providers how to work safely in Ebola treatment wards. So far, five Ebola infected Americans have been brought back to the United States from West Africa in specially equipped "air ambulances." Two remain hospitalized One, who has not been identified, has been treated in an isolation unit at Emory University Hospital since Sept. 9, and another, an NBC News freelance cameraman, arrived at Nebraska Medical Center on Monday. A Norwegian doctor who became stricken with Ebola while working in Sierra Leone was medevaced to Norway on Tuesday, and a French nurse who contracted Ebola while volunteering with Doctors Without Borders was released from a French hospital over the weekend. As opposed to the case in Dallas, where Thomas Eric Duncan was diagnosed after traveling from Liberia to the United States through Brussels, the repatriated patients are not people who showed up at U.S. or European emergency rooms unannounced, testing the ability of those facilities to identify a potential Ebola case. In these cases, hospital officials and health care workers were expecting Ebola patients, and, in theory, have been prepared to minimize the risk of transmission while caring for them. Shelly Schwedhelm, nursing director of Nebraska Medical Center's bio containment unit, said on Tuesday that she doesn't believe it's possible for a fate similar to the Spanish nurse's to befall one of her staff members or colleagues. "There are always things that can happen, but I feel very comfortable and confident with the personnel and the procedures in the unit," she said. But similar situations to the Spanish case are "unavoidable" and "will happen also in the future, most likely," the World Health Organization's European regional director Zsuzsanna Jakab told Reuters. "The unfortunate news that's going on in Spain, it can't help but increase some of that anxiety that's going on right now," David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, said on a conference call with reporters Tuesday. Lakey emphasized that Texas medical personnel are being extremely careful in treating Duncan. At the Nebraska facility, someone constantly monitors caregivers as they're putting on and removing protective gear, to ensure it's done properly and in the right order. Gear includes head covers, respirators, gowns, boots, "triple gloves" and visors. All waste from the bio containment unit is run through a large medical sterilizer called an autoclave. The Spanish case was briefly discussed in the Nebraska team's morning huddle Tuesday. But, Schwedhelm said "Honestly, they're eager to know what happened, but there are absolutely no concerns for themselves at the moment." Those working with the repatriated patients in Nebraska there are more than 40 of them on the team, Schwedhelm said volunteered for Ebola detail and went through an application process. Many staff members were "eager to get back in the unit" Monday when the center received its newest patient, NBC News cameraman Ashoka Mukpo. The facility's first Ebola patient, missionary doctor Richard Sacra, was discharged late last month. There are far more West African medical and aid workers than foreign nationals treating Ebola patients on the front lines of the outbreak Doctors Without Borders alone has about 3,000 in the region, compared to about 250 foreign nationals. But, public health officials say, allowing for the possibility of repatriation in the event of an infection is a critical recruitment tool as global aid organizations struggle to enlist foreign health care workers and volunteers. "We still need to continue the measures for evacuation of staff because we recognize that there's an extraordinary burden carried by health workers and doctors working on Ebola," WHO spokesman Daniel Epstein said. "They're at the forefront of fighting the disease ." The United States could see more American patients brought back home if any U.S. service members contract Ebola during the military's operation in West Africa, they will be brought back to the United States for treatment, Gen. David Rodriguez, the chief of U.S. Africa Command, said Tuesday. A few voices have come out against bringing Ebola infected Americans back for treatment. Among those critical of the repatriation of infected aid workers Donald Trump and Ben Carson. But the public outcry here has been limited. In contrast, there was widespread controversy in Spain when that nation repatriated a priest from West Africa to the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid, with health care workers saying the country was ill equipped to treat him. Daniel Bernab u, the president of Spain's doctors' trade union, called the move "political rather than health related," the Guardian reported at the time. He also pointed out that Spain had just one hospital with adequate bio safety measures and that even there, the safety measures lagged behind those found in numerous U.S. hospitals. In August, after the first repatriated American Ebola patients were discharged in Atlanta, Bruce Ribner, medical director of Emory's Infectious Disease Unit, said "We were very hopeful that with the level of support we can deliver in our facility, that we would have a substantially better outcome than our colleagues practicing with lesser developed health care systems." Ribner, who led the team that treated doctor Kent Brantly and missionary worker Nancy Writebol, noted that the lessons learned in caring for those two patients would "help advance the world's understanding of how to treat Ebola virus infections, and hopefully to improve survival in parts of the world where patients with this infection are treated." And, he declared "It was the right decision to bring these patients back to Emory for treatment." On Tuesday, in Omaha, Nebraska Medical Center's Schwedhelm said she felt similarly about treating Sacra and, now, Mukpo. "These are Americans and we want to be able to provide them with the best care possible," she said. "I feel very confident, and in doing that, we're fulfilling our role and responsibility. That's what I trained for." Mark Berman contributed to this report. RELATED READING Post Exclusive How the world failed to stop the Ebola epidemic Dallas patient I would have preferred to die in Liberia rather than expose fianc e to Ebola U.S. will increase Ebola screenings, but won't impose travel bans Here's what the Ebola epidemic (still) looks like in West Africa Live chat with Post reporters and Ebola experts. Submit questions Dallas officials send a message of calm about Ebola risk
Spain already panicking as nurse gets killer bug and now Britain's top doctor has ordered the NHS to prepare for the deadly virus Health chiefs last night insisted the NHS would cope with a mass Ebola outbreak amid fears the killer virus could hit Britain. Doctors, nurses and pharmacists up and down the land were warned to look out for symptoms in patients arriving from West Africa where the disease is raging or who have had contact with anyone recently returned from the region. The red alert came as Spanish health chiefs launched an investigation into how a nurse there became the first person outside of Sierra Leone, Liberia or Guinea to catch Ebola, sparking panic across the country. Scientists predict the virus has a 50 chance of reaching our shores in 16 days October 24. Chief medical officer Professor Dame Sally Davies told medical staff "This is to update you on Ebola in West Africa, and to remind you of the need to remain vigilant for cases imported to the UK. It is unlikely but not impossible that people infected in Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia could arrive in the UK while incubating the disease and develop symptoms after their return." In a section entitled Implications for the UK she urged "every clinician in England" to take a full travel history from all patients with a fever. Prof Davies' five page warning issued via the NHS Central Alerting System and seen by the Mirror came as David Cameron ordered an emergency Cobra meeting on how to deal with a deadly spread here. Public Health England also announced Ebola medical advice had been sent to immigration centres, universities and schools. The body's director of global health Dr Brian McCloskey insisted "plans were in place" to deal with any outbreak. He added "Our robust, well developed and well tested NHS systems for managing unusual infectious diseases are active permanently, and always available and regularly tested and proven to be effective. The overall risk of Ebola to the UK remains low." But Prof Davies warned UK aid workers in West Africa now face a bigger chance of catching the disease which has killed more than 3,400 people in the region and infected around 7,500. More than 6,000 people a week arrive in Britain on around 40 flights from Nigeria, Ghana and The Gambia which lie near the affected areas and are major transport hubs. But PHE ruled out introducing Ebola screening for passengers as the US plan to do. It said the World Health Organization does not recommend the move and it would mean screening "huge numbers of low risk people". Ebola victims are not infectious until they display symptoms which include high fever, bleeding and central nervous system damage. International Development Secretary Justine Greening yesterday said the Government will continue to keep travel tighter restrictions under review. British Airways has suspended flights to Liberia and Sierra Leone. Earlier this week scientists calculated the odds of the virus spreading to Europe, based on flight patterns and said there was a 50 50 chance of it hitting Britain. Study author Dr Derek Gatherer, of Lancaster University, said "If this continues to rage on in West Africa and gets worse, then it's only a matter of time before one of these cases ends up on a plane to Europe." Mr Cameron yesterday spoke to Sierra Leone president Ernest Koroma. Downing Street said "They discussed how the 125million in UK aid was helping efforts. The president said the situation was very serious and they need to train more medical staff and improve the burial process." What is Ebola and how does it spread? A Norwegian aid worker contracted the disease in Sierra Leone and is being treated in Oslo. Around 1,200 Germans are preparing to fly to West Africa along with troops to help with the crisis after answering a call for volunteers. Fury was last night growing in Spain after nurse Teresa Romero Ramos contracted Ebola. She had treated two Spanish priests who later died of the disease after being flown home from Africa. The EC has asked medical chiefs to explain how she became infected. Officials were racing to trace up to 30 staff who had been in contact with Teresa and patients they have treated. Medics claimed protective suits given to them and Teresa were substandard and may not have stopped the virus, which is spread by contact with bodily fluids. Hospital workers held protests over the apparent lack of standards. The victim was yesterday moved under police escort to Carlos III hospital in Madrid. She was said to be stable. Her husband Javier Limon Romero and two others were in quarantine. He last night claimed health chiefs want to put down their dog Excalibur because of its contact with him and his wife. Back in Britain, a little boy from Sierra Leone has been banned from a school after parents feared their children would be infected by Ebola. Kofi Mason Sesay, nine, was due to start St Simon's Catholic primary in Stockport, Gtr Manchester, for an annual placement as his British mum Miriam , 48, carries out charity work in Africa. Health officials insisted he carried no risk. But Miriam said "There was so much pressure from an ignorant parent body that the school had to act." Poll loading ...
By Ronald R. Cherry A Spanish nurse has contracted Ebola in Spain while caring for a Spanish Priest who became infected with Ebola in West Africa. The Priest died of Ebola, so let's pray that his nurse survives. "A nursing auxiliary in Madrid has tested positive for Ebola after treating a patient in the Spanish capital, according to Spanish newspaper El Pais. The case is believed to be first in which a person contracts Ebola from a source outside of Africa. While the woman has not been identified, El Pais reports that she is 44 years old, married without children, and originally from Galicia, though she has worked for more than 15 years in Carlos III Hospital in Madrid. She has not left Spain or come in contact with the Ebola virus except for her work in treating Manual Garc a Viejo... The newspaper notes that the nurse brought herself to Alcorc n hospital's emergency room after experiencing a fever, and was tested twice for Ebola, both times with positive results. Co workers tell El Pais they are shocked by the contamination, given that the hospital used "extreme" protection against the disease." The Spanish nurse likely became infected with Ebola via airborne transmission. No doubt she had extreme protection against direct contact with the body and body fluids of the Ebola patient, but that is not good enough. "Being at first skeptical that Ebola virus could be an aerosol transmissible disease, we are now persuaded by a review of experimental and epidemiologic data that this might be an important feature of disease transmission, particularly in healthcare settings... We believe there is scientific and epidemiologic evidence that Ebola virus has the potential to be transmitted via infectious aerosol particles both near and at a distance from infected patients, which means that healthcare workers should be wearing respirators, not facemasks... We strongly urge the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) to seek funds for the purchase and transport of PAPRs powered air purifying respirators to all healthcare workers currently fighting the battle against Ebola throughout Africa and beyond." Airborne transmission of Ebola probably accounts for this case and others, such as Dr. Kent Brantly, who also exercised extreme caution but not enough caution he did not use a HEPA filtered full face respirator. Under CDC guidelines healthcare workers are protected against direct contact but not against inhalation or eye exposure to microscopic contaminated droplet nuclei, which cannot be seen and which can travel across a room with air currents, and which can remain infectious for about an hour and a half. "The potential for transmission via inhalation of aerosols, therefore, cannot be ruled out by the observed risk factors or our knowledge of the infection process. Many body fluids, such as vomit, diarrhea, blood, and saliva, are capable of creating inhalable aerosol particles in the immediate vicinity of an infected person. Cough was identified among some cases in a 1995 outbreak in Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo, and coughs are known to emit viruses in respirable particles. The act of vomiting produces an aerosol and has been implicated in airborne transmission of gastrointestinal viruses. Regarding diarrhea, even when contained by toilets, toilet flushing emits a pathogen laden aerosol that disperses in the air... Aerosolized (1 3 mcm) Marburg, Ebola, and Reston viruses, at 50 to 55 relative humidity and 72 F, had biological decay rates of 3.04 , 3.06 . and 1.55 per minute, respectively. These rates indicate that 99 loss in aerosol infectivity would occur in 93, 104, and 162 minutes, respectively." If, as the CDC asserts, Ebola is not transmitted through the air by microscopic droplet nuclei, then why do U.S. Government and American academic researchers take care to handle the Ebola virus only in BL4 biocontainment facilities while the rest of us are left to struggle against Ebola at the local hospital? The potential for this strain of Ebola is exponential, and we have 300 million unvaccinated sitting ducks we Americans. Our government has failed in its primary duty to defend and protect the American people. I believe our pharmaceutical companies would have developed Ebola vaccines years ago were it not for Big Brother. Ronald R. Cherry
MADRID Doctors in Spain hospitalised three more people and rushed to identify dozens of others at risk on Tuesday (Oct 7) after a nurse was infected with the deadly Ebola virus, raising fears of contagion in Europe. The European Union demanded answers about how the disease spread in a specialised disease unit, while health staff protested over safety failures. The nurse was identified by Spanish media as Teresa Romero, a woman in her forties who worked at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital. She became the first person to contract the disease outside Africa after caring for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died from the virus following their return from west Africa where the disease has killed nearly 3,500 people. Officials said they were trying to find out who she came into contact with before being isolated on Monday. They were monitoring 52 people mostly health staff. "It would be very naive to think that there is no possibility of contagion," the government's health emergencies coordinator Fernando Simon told Cadena Ser radio. Doctors at the hospital said her husband was also at "high risk" and was put in isolation. Another "suspect case" a Spanish engineer recently returned from Nigeria was also being monitored. A fourth patient, one of the nurse's colleagues, who had suffered from diarrhoea, has also been taken in for observation, the hospital said. The infected nurse treated Spanish priest Miguel Pajares, 75, who was infected with Ebola in Liberia and died on Aug 12, as well as Manuel Garcia Viejo, 69, who was repatriated from Sierra Leone and died on Sep 25. She is believed to have contracted the virus while caring for Garcia Viejo. The European Commission has written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation, an EU spokesman said in Brussels. However Peter Piot, one of the scientists who discovered Ebola, said while the disease posed a threat to healthcare workers around the world, there was "no risk that I see for outbreaks" in developed countries. Spanish government officials said the nurse began to feel ill on Sep 30 while on leave after treating the two missionaries, but was not admitted to hospital until five days later. Health workers' unions said the nurse had called the Carlos III hospital when she felt ill but was first referred back to a local health centre. The hospital's director, Rafael Perez Santamarina, said she was not admitted at that time because she did not yet have a high fever or other Ebola symptoms. The nurse's husband, named as Javier Limon by the Spanish press, told El Mundo newspaper she "did everything they told her" when she reported feeling ill. He also vowed to fight an order by Madrid health authorities to kill their dog Excalibur over health concerns and drew the backing of animal rights groups. Medical staff protested outside the main site of La Paz hospital in their white coats, yelling for Health Minister Ana Mato to resign. Health worker unions complained staff had not been adequately trained. "We do not have the infrastructure to tackle a virus like this," said Elena Moral, leader of the CSIF AGCM union. The EU announced it start airlifting 100 tonnes of relief aid on Friday to Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea including personal protection equipment like masks, gloves and medicines. The head of the US military's Africa Command, General David Rodriguez, said American troops deployed to west Africa could stay there for up to a year. Ebola causes severe fever, vomiting, diarrhoea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. It spreads through contact and bodily fluids. There is no vaccine and no widely available cure, but one treatment, dubbed ZMapp, has shown promising early results and has been fast tracked for mass production. Ebola has caused 3,439 deaths out of 7,478 cases across five west African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal according to the latest WHO tally. Patients have been treated for the disease in Europe and the United States, but until now all the cases stemmed from people who caught the virus in west Africa. Madrid's IBEX 35 stock index closed 2.02 percent lower and other European markets also fell on news of the infection, with travel and tourism groups hit hard. The International Monetary Fund warned in a report on Tuesday that economic damage from the Ebola outbreak could spread beyond west Africa and become global.
A nurse who cared for an Ebola patient repatriated to a Madrid hospital has contracted the disease, the Spanish health ministry announced on 6 October. The news is unfortunately not surprising, however. Although Ebola is relatively difficult to catch in the community because infection requires contact with the bodily fluids such as blood or vomit of an infected person, close contacts and health care workers treating Ebola patients have long been recognised as groups most at risk of contracting the virus. Health care workers have already paid a heavy price in the current epidemic in west Africa as of 1 October, the World Health Organization estimates that 382 have contracted Ebola, and 216 of them have died. Spanish authorities will investigate how the nurse at the Carlos III hospital came to be infected, and whether there were any shortcomings in infection control such as in the personal protective equipment supplied, training in its use, or in hospital hygiene. As someone who recently treated an Ebola patient, the nurse would have been considered a contact at risk of exposure to the virus, and have been monitored for any symptoms such as fever, that could signal the onset of Ebola. Such surveillance of contacts is critical to preventing any onward spread of virus. It's important to remember that people with Ebola don't become infectious until they start showing symptoms, so monitoring of contacts of an Ebola infected patient for fever is usually considered sufficient, with them being isolated only at the first hint of illness although some authorities may choose to quarantine high risk contacts. Such early isolation is crucial to limit the number of people they could come into contact with. A key question for Spanish authorities will be whether there was any delay between when the nurse first showed symptoms and when she was isolated. They will then try to trace every single person she was in contact during that period and monitor them for symptoms for 21 days, the maximum incubation period of the disease (see "How disease detectives are fighting Ebola's spread" for an explainer of this process of 'contact tracing'). That contacts of the nurse might in turn become infected cannot be ruled out, but the case does not raise any major threat of an outbreak of Ebola in Europe. Risk assessments of the current outbreak have long factored in the prospect that infected people would occasionally travel from the epicentre of the epidemic in west Africa to distant unaffected areas, and that healthcare workers are among those most at risk of secondary infections. The Spanish case raises legitimate concerns as to the preparedness of hospitals to safely treat Ebola patients, and spotlights the need for health facilities everywhere to review their own precautions and practice. But even with the best training and equipment, the infectious nature of bodily fluids that carry Ebola means that accidental infections of healthcare workers treating patients with the virus will unfortunately continue. In its latest risk assessment, the the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control reiterated that "if a symptomatic case of Ebola presents in an EU Member State, secondary transmission to caregivers in the family and in healthcare facilities cannot be ruled out." Europe's well developed public health services are, however, well placed to quickly stamp out any further chains of transmission using contact tracing. The big lessons of the new Spanish case, as in the recent case of a traveler from Liberia diagnosed with Ebola in Dallas, Texas, are the same that unless the international community acts far faster, and on a far larger scale, to tackle Ebola at its source in west Africa, exported cases and the repatriation of sick health care workers will continue and family, and healthcare workers caring for them will continue to become infected with Ebola.
The nurse had helped to treat two priests who contracted Ebola in Africa and were repatriated to Spain. Some 30 other health workers and those who came in contact with her are now being monitored for symptoms. Both priests died shortly after reaching Spain. Each had worked in West Africa, where an epidemic of Ebola has spread through Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia since March, killing more than 3,400 people in the largest outbreak of the disease in history. Cases have also reached Senegal and Nigeria. Spanish officials said they still had to find out how the nurse, who was not named but identified as married with no children, contracted the viral infection, which causes fever and bleeding. "At the moment we are investigating the way in which the professional was infected," Antonio Alemany, the head of Madrid's primary health care services told a news conference. The nurse was one of a specialist team who treated elderly priest Manuel Garcia Viejo at the Madrid hospital Carlos III when he was repatriated from Sierra Leone with Ebola on Sept 21. He died four days later. Garcia Viejo was kept in isolation during his treatment last month and officials said they followed a strict protocol designed to protect health workers and patients at the hospital. The nurse who has since fallen ill only entered Garcia Viejo's room twice, once after his death, Alemany said. Health authorities said she had also helped treat Miguel Pajares, who had been working in Liberia when he came down with the disease. He was airlifted back to Spain on Aug 7 and died five days later. The Spanish nurse went on holiday immediately after Garcia's death on Sept 25 and began feeling sick on Sept 30, said Alemany. He did not say where the nurse went on holiday. "We have started studying all of the contacts the patient had since her symptoms began, including the health professionals who have been treating her," Alemany said. The nurse's husband was also being monitored, he said. Scientists tracking the Ebola epidemic in West Africa and analyzing air traffic data have predicted a high risk of a case being imported unwittingly into Europe before the end of this month. The first Ebola case to be diagnosed in the United States was identified last week in a man from Liberia, who U.S. health officials say is now in a critical condition. The Geneva based WHO said it was notified of the Spanish case at around 3 00 p.m. EDT on Monday. "This was a preliminary notification and Spain is doing an intensive investigation into the mode of transmission and into the contacts of the nurse," a WHO spokeswoman said. Patients are at their most contagious when Ebola is in its terminal stages, inducing both internal and external bleeding, and profuse vomiting and diarrhea all of which contain high concentrations of infectious virus. But the disease can also have a long incubation period up to 21 days meaning that people can be unaware for weeks that they are infected, and not feel or display any symptoms. Virologist Benjamin Neuman of the Britain's University of Reading said health workers always face risks handling Ebola patients regardless of whether they used protective equipment. "Nurses face a problem in that a person who is sick with Ebola can make quite a lot of highly infectious waste, as the patient loses fluid through diarrhea and vomiting," he said. "Those bodily fluids can contain millions of Ebola viruses, and it only takes one to transfer the infection." The nurse, who was initially treated for fever symptoms at the hospital of Alcorcon, in the outskirts of Madrid, was due to be transferred later on Monday to the Madrid hospital Carlos III where Garcia Viejo was treated. She is in a stable condition, health officials said.
Madrid (CNN) Four more potential cases of Ebola were under observation Tuesday in Spain, health authorities said Tuesday, a day after a nurse's assistant became the first person known to have contracted the deadly virus outside Africa in the current outbreak. The woman helped treat two Spanish missionaries, both of whom had contracted Ebola in West Africa, one in Liberia and the other in Sierra Leone. Both died after returning to Spain. Spain has outbreak's 1st known case of contracting Ebola outside of Africa The developments come just as the organization Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) reports that a Norwegian staff member has contracted the deadly virus. The staffer had been working in the Sierra Leone city of Bo and was placed in isolation Sunday after developing a fever, the organization said. The worker is being sent to a treatment center in Europe. In Spain, no details have yet been given of exactly how the nurse's assistant contracted the virus, and her condition is unknown. Francisco Arnalis, head of internal medicine at the Carlos III Hospital, told a news conference that the three other potential Ebola cases are being monitored there. A hospital spokeswoman said later Tuesday that another nurse's assistant who is on the same team as the infected nurse's assistant is under observation. This more recent case was admitted to the hospital after she "started having a little bit of a temperature," said the spokeswoman, who wasn't named as is customary in Spain. Earlier, health officials explained that one of the people being monitored is the original nurse's assistant's husband, who faces a high risk of infection and had no protection. Another is a suspected case in a man who traveled overseas and has tested negative twice. The fourth, a nurse, is not a suspected case but has been brought in as a precaution after suffering diarrhea. She was exposed, but she was wearing protective gear, Arnalis said. Thirty people from Carlos III Hospital and 22 others from Alcorcon hospital plus family members are being monitored, according to authorities. It was not immediately known whether the nurse's assistant hospitalized late Tuesday was one of these 30 contacts at Carlos III Hospital. The hospital will not release information about the status of the nurse's assistant, who has not been named, in order to respect her privacy, director Rafael Santamaria said. The hospital has two potential treatments at its disposal, said Dr. Jose Ramon Arribas, one using an IV drip with the antibodies of Ebola survivors and the other an antiviral drug. "This is a treatment that the WHO (World Health Organization) has recommended, even though they haven't verified its efficacy," he said of the IV drip. EU We need to know what happened Spanish authorities have said that all the proper protocols and procedures were followed in the care of the two missionaries. But the European Union has asked for an explanation as to how the woman was infected. European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said on Tuesday that "Spain told us all the protocols have been followed, but obviously something wrong happened." There have been 10 evacuations of Ebola infected patients from Africa to Europe, eight of those within the European Union, Vincent said and it is first time that something like this has happened. "The hospitals where the patients are being taken are supposed to be equipped and ready to deal with Ebola patients," he said. "If protocols are being followed, it's highly unlikely that an outbreak could happen in the EU. But again, zero risk doesn't exist, particularly in a hospital, where staff deal with sick people. "We need to find out as soon as possible what happened and if we need to revise procedures." There will be an extra meeting of European officials to discuss the Spanish Ebola case on Wednesday, he said. The World Health Organization said it was "ready to provide support to Spain, as and if required," as it investigates the case and traces the infected woman's contacts. In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron will lead a Cabinet meeting to discuss way to coordinate how to handle response to Ebola there, if it's necessary. Cameron called Sierra Leone President Ernest Bai Koroma to discuss the status of the outbreak in the West African nation and talk about how aid the UK has provided is helping. According to Downing Street, the Sierra Leone leader said the situation continues to be "very serious" and there was a need to train more medical staff, improve burial processes and develop a better system for running service treatment centers. Unions question equipment used Some Spanish unions have blamed the government, saying they warned it that the personal protective equipment used by the medical team was not of the highest standard. Angry doctors and nurses outside the Carlos III Hospital where the nurse's assistant is being treated and where the two missionaries were cared for before her said they were outraged the pair had been brought to the hospital, one in August and the other in September. Ebola drugs in the works They said that the two priests, Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia Viejo, were almost dead when they arrived, and that they should not have been brought back to Spain, thereby putting other people's lives at risk. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato announced Monday that testing had confirmed the nurse's assistant has the virus. The husband of the nurse's assistant, who is under observation, is not sick, a spokesman for the Health Ministry said. It was not clear whether he is under quarantine. The couple have no children. The assistant was one of about 30 health professionals in Spain who helped treat the Ebola patients. They and the ambulance team that took her to the hospital are now reportedly under observation. No word on where she took her vacation Health officials said the assistant developed symptoms on September 30. She was not hospitalized until this week, when her only symptom was a fever. She was first taken to a hospital in southern Madrid before being transferred to Carlos III Hospital, where she had helped care for the Ebola patients. The second of the missionaries died on September 26, and she went on vacation a day later, health officials said. They have not said where that vacation was taken. A few days later, she reported that she was not feeling well but her temperatures were not very high, officials said. It was only several days later that her temperature soared and she was hospitalized. An investigation is underway to find everyone the assistant may have had contact with while infectious. So far, there are no other known related cases. Health authorities have urged people to stay calm, as they hope that the virus' spread is contained. "We are working in coordination to give the best care to the patient and to guarantee the safety of all citizens," said Mato, the health minister. Obama National security priority The news came amid growing fears in the United States that the disease could spread. The first person to be diagnosed in the United States with Ebola, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical but stable condition in Texas, according to Candace White, a spokeswoman for Texas Health. He is on a ventilator and receiving kidney dialysis, she said, adding that his liver function, which declined over the weekend, has improved. He is continuing to receive an investigational medication, White said. During a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention press conference on Monday, CNN asked Texas Department of State Health Services Dr. David Lakey how care protocols in Spain compared to those involving Duncan in Texas. Lakey said he personally went to the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital ward in Dallas where the patient is being treated, and saw that there was extensive security and a detailed method of how providers were protecting themselves. "They take this really seriously," he said, describing treatment protocol as "meticulous." CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said none of the people who Duncan came into contact with before his diagnosis that the CDC has identified for monitoring has shown symptoms. Frieden also said the agency has not made final decisions about possible ways to screen at airports in the United States. Meanwhile, some of the U.S. military personnel being deployed to Liberia to help tackle the Ebola crisis may come into contact with the virus, a Pentagon official said Tuesday. The head of U.S. Africa Command, Gen. David Rodriguez, said that while the majority of U.S. troops involved in the mission would not be exposed to the disease, those in mobile testing labs could have contact in that environment. "They're all trained at a very, very high level," Rodriguez told reporters of the lab personnel, who constitute a "separate, specialty element of the force." President Obama told reporters Monday, "As I've said from the start of this outbreak, I consider this a top national security priority. This is not just a matter of charity. ... This is an issue about our safety." Obama called for protocols to help stop the spread of the disease, including additional air passenger screening, while downplaying the risk of an epidemic in the United States. In Liberia, Ebola is killing Thomas Duncan's neighbors Ebola has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, with more than 7,400 suspected, probable and confirmed cases. The virus is transmitted through close and direct physical contact with infected bodily fluids, the most infectious being blood, feces and vomit. The incubation period, from the time of infection to symptoms, is two to 21 days. CNN's Al Goodman reported from Madrid, and Laura Smith Spark wrote in London. CNN's Laura Perez Maestro, Marilia Brocchetto and Nick Thompson contributed to this report.
Spanish health authorities reacted forcefully today after a nurse's aide was found to have contracted Ebola, putting her in an isolation unit, quarantining her husband and two other people, and getting a court order to euthanize her dog. The case marked the first time the disease has been contracted outside of west Africa and has alarmed health workers throughout Europe. The European Union has demanded an explanation from Spain as to how the health worker could have become infected. "Tomorrow morning, we will have an audio conference call of EU's Health Security Committee," said Frederic Vincent, a spokesman for European Health Commission. "We will all listen very carefully to what the Spanish officials have to tell us on why was the hospital not ready for Ebola patients." The response by Madrid raised the specter that pets could spread the disease. The city of Madrid got a court order to euthanize and incinerate the woman's dog over her and her husband's objections, according to the Associated Press. The dog is a mixed breed pooch named Excalibur. The government said available scientific knowledge suggests a risk that the dog could transmit the virus to humans. Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a news conference today, "We have not identified this as means of transmission," but declined to comment on the actions by Madrid officials. Texas health commissioner David Lakey, who has said they are monitoring about 50 people who had contact with the Ebola patient in Dallas, said, "We are not monitoring any animals at this time." The Spanish patient, who has not been publicly identified, worked as the equivalent of a nurse's aide at Madrid's Carlos III hospital. She was part of a team that treated two Ebola patients who were repatriated from West Africa after contracting the disease. The medical team treated a missionary Miguel Pajares, 75, who was repatriated home from Liberia in August and died five days later. The same team took care of Mario Garcia Viejo, 69, a Spanish missionary who got infected in Sierra Leone and was flown to Madrid for treatment four days before he died on Sept. 25. Texas Ebola Patient Thomas Eric Duncan Now Getting Experimental Drug What to Know About the Experimental Drug Being Given to the Texas Ebola Patient US Journalist With Ebola Leaves Liberia to Be Treated in Nebraska The woman, 44, had contact with Viejo twice. Once when he was still alive and she had to change his diapers, and a second time after he died and she had to take out his sheets, clothing and bodily wastes, public health official said. She went on holiday after Viejo's death, although officials insist she never left Madrid. Officials said the woman wasn't feeling well for a week before she was admitted to the isolation unit. El Mundo daily reported that it was the nurse who asked repeatedly to be tested for Ebola, before it was done on Monday. Since her disease was diagnosed, her husband, who has no sign of disease, and two more people including a colleague who treated Viejo are being monitored in the hospital in a bid to try to stop the spread of the deadly virus. In addition, health authorities said they are monitoring more than 50 possible contacts of the nurse's aide. The team has a strict safety protocol in place, which includes double impregnated gown, gloves, masks and protective eye glasses, according to health officials. "We are investigating how she got contaminated and if protocols were respected," said Rosa Serrano, an official with Spanish health ministry. Staff at the hospital told El Pais daily that the protective gowns they were using did not meet World Health Organization criteria, which require them to be impermeable and have a breathing equipment. Staff also complained about low quality latex gloves. Spain was the first European country to repatriate home infected patients for treatment. Some health professionals said that Spanish hospitals were not well equipped to handle Ebola patients. "For instance in the U.S. there are 10 hospitals with level 4 isolation and here only Carlos III with level 2 and level 3," says Pedro Martinez of AMYTS, the union representing doctors. Despite the situation in Spain, European Health Commission thinks that a European Ebola epidemic "is very unlikely, and that in some way it could be a lesson for other member states," Vincent said.
By Tetsuya Mizuno Yomiuri Shimbun CorrespondentNEW YORK The U.S. Mission to the United Nations has presented to U.N. Security Council members a draft of a Security Council resolution on the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, calling for a coordinated international response to the deadly virus. The draft of the resolution obtained by The Yomiuri Shimbun on Tuesday calls on nations to provide urgent aid and lift travel restrictions that could isolate the Ebola infected region. The United States seeks to hold an emergency Security Council session on the Ebola outbreak on Thursday and have the resolution adopted at the meeting. It is unusual for the Security Council to adopt a resolution on public health. The Security Council adopted resolutions in 2000 and 2011 that called for preventing HIV infection in Africa. It will be the first time for the Security Council to intensively discuss a resolution on measures to deal with an infectious disease since that time. The draft resolution presented to the Security Council members on Monday notes the "unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak constitutes a threat to international peace and security." The draft urges U.N. member states to provide urgent aid, including medical supplies and personnel with expertise in infectious diseases. The draft aims to prevent misinformation, such as about how one becomes infected, from spreading and deepening confusion. It calls on U.N. member states and other relevant actors providing assistance "to enhance efforts to communicate to the public, as well as to implement the established safety and health protocols and preventive measures to mitigate against misinformation and undue alarm about the transmission and extent of the outbreak among and between individuals." The draft also refers to travel restrictions to countries where many people are reportedly infected with Ebola. It "calls on Member States, including of the region, to lift general travel and border restrictions imposed ... and also calls on airlines and shipping companies to maintain trade and transport links with affected countries and the wider region." There is concern the travel restrictions could isolate affected countries and hinder support activities by other countries. "If the outbreak is not stopped now, we could be looking at hundreds of thousands of people infected," U.S. President Barack Obama said in Atlanta on Tuesday. The United States plans to provide its own assistance, including dispatching 3,000 troops to the affected region.Speech
The UN Security Council chamber, as seen from the US delegate's seat. The United Nations (UN) Security Council today unanimously adopted a resolution to create a special mission the first ever geared to a public health crisis to coordinate and help steer the increasing flow of global resources to battle West Africa's Ebola epidemic. Addressing the council ahead of the vote, World Health Organization (WHO) Director General Margaret Chan, MD, MPH, told the group, "The WHO has managed many big outbreaks, but this even is different. It's the biggest peacetime challenge we have ever faced." "This is a threat to national security, beyond the outbreak countries," she said. The proceedings were webcast today on the UN's site. David Nabarro, MD, senior UN system coordinator for Ebola disease, praised the work and contributions countries have made and will make and said what's needed is a strong backbone of support to coordinate the efforts. The resolution had more than 130 member country cosponsors, which Samantha Power, US representative to the UN, said was the most for any of the 2,176 resolution since the the global body was created. "But it's what happens next that counts." Jackson Niamah, a Doctors without Border (MSF) treatment center coordinator who spoke to the group by live video from Monrovia, pleaded with the international community for help, and shared heartbreaking anecdotes about his coworkers dying of the disease, countless people dying alone from a humiliating disease, and a symptomatic child being turned away from the gate of a treatment center that was too full to take him. He said the outbreak countries need staff for contact tracing, public awareness efforts, and treatment beds, but they also need basics such as soap and water, which some households don't have. "We need your help. We need it now." Following the vote, representatives from Security Council members and several others detailed the contributions their countries have made and are considering. Australia's ambassador, Gary Quinlan, said he welcomed US leadership and spoke to the need for a massive global scale up to the response. He said Australia is currently considering how it can best contribute to the effort. Security Council members also heard from representatives from outbreak countries, including one from Liberia who called on countries who have closed their borders to reopen them to ease the response. He said the closures "border on blanket stigmatization." Meanwhile, the WHO today said the number of Ebola virus disease (EVD) cases in West Africa as of Sep 14 has grown to 5,335, with deaths rising to 2,622. Global health officials have said the official numbers greatly underestimate the true impact of the disease. The number includes 372 more infections and 169 more deaths since the WHO's last update just 2 days ago. Much of the increase has been driven by steady increases in Liberia's and Sierra Leone's capitals, though infections appear to be decreasing in Guinea due to a drop in the number of cases from Macenta, which has been one of the outbreak hot spots. In other hot spots, the number of new cases hints at a possible stabilization in Liberia's Lofa county and Sierra Leone's Kailahun and Kenema districts, according to the WHO. However, the agency said cases have increased in a number of other Sierra Leone districts. The WHO also outlined the pressure the disease is placing on treatment center capacity. It said Liberia's 315 bed capacity is meeting less than 20 of the demand. It said Monrovia needs 1,210 beds, but only 240 are currently available. Sierra Leone has only 165 beds, which meets 25 of the country's demand. So far 318 healthcare workers, one of the hardest hit groups, have been sickened in the outbreak, and 151 have died from their infections, the WHO said. Burial teams in Liberia are overwhelmed, with teams handling 10 to 15 dead bodies each day, the WHO said. More teams are being formed to assist with safe burial, with six more teams being trained to work in Monrovia, which would double the number. The WHO said its African regional office just completed a response plan for unaffected countries in the region, which will receive support to reach EVD outbreak readiness goals.
News outlets report on U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki moon's statement ahead of high level meetings that the U.N. will take a stronger leadership role in efforts to contain Ebola. New York Times U.N. Leader Plans Stronger Presence in Ebola Zone "The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki moon, said on Wednesday that he planned to establish a new on the ground mission in West Africa to coordinate the struggle against Ebola, a move that signaled his concern with the response so far and the limitations of the World Health Organization's abilities. ... Mr. Ban is scheduled to address a Security Council meeting devoted to Ebola on Thursday afternoon and said he was hoping to convene a special General Assembly session on Friday..." (Sengupta et al., 9 17). U.N. News Centre Ban welcomes U.S. support in Ebola response ahead of Security Council emergency session on outbreak "Secretary General Ban Ki moon, together with the head of the United Nations health agency, will outline the international action plan to contain Ebola Thursday when the Security Council convenes an emergency meeting on the outbreak..." (9 17). VOA News Ban U.N. 'Taking Lead' on Ebola Response "U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki moon said the United Nations is 'taking the lead' in efforts to combat the Ebola virus outbreak in West Africa. ... The U.N. Security Council is due to vote Thursday on a U.S. drafted resolution calling on member states to quickly send aid, field hospitals, and health workers to affected countries and lift travel restrictions to those areas..." (9 17).
For the first time in its history, the United Nations held an emergency meeting on a public health crisis. The Security Council voted to declare West Africa's Ebola outbreak a "threat to international peace and security." New numbers from the World Health Organization show more than 2,600 people have died from Ebloa and more than 5,000 have been infected. When it comes to fighting Ebola, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Samantha Power told Anderson that "words are meaningless, unless the words today turn into concrete commitments."
Russia to Send Cargo With Ebola Protection Gear to Guinea Russian Health Watchdog UNITED NATIONS, September 18 (RIA Novosti) With the number of Ebola cases doubling every three weeks, UN Secretary General Ban Ki moon on Thursday proposed the Security Council to establish an emergency health mission to address the lethal threat. "I have decided to establish a UN emergency health mission, combining the World Health Organization's strategic perspective with a very strong logistics and operational capability," the UN Secretary General announced. Ban said that this international mission will be called the UN Mission for Ebola Emergency Response or UNMEER, and "will have five priorities stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks." This Ebola outbreak was first reported in Guinea in March and then spread to Liberia and Sierra Leone. As of September 16, according to the World Health Organization, there are 4,985 reported cases and 2,461 deaths from Ebola, mostly in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Ban said on Thursday that in these three countries "the disease is destroying health systems. More people are not dying in Liberia from treatable ailments and common medical conditions, than from Ebola." Ban said, "the outbreak is the largest the world has ever seen. The number of cases is doubling every three weeks. There will soon be more cases in Liberia alone than in the four decade history of the disease." The impact is more than medical, Ban said, adding that "inflation and food prices are rising. Transport and social services are being disrupted." Ban on Thursday said "I welcome the resolution to be adopted today by the Security Council. Tomorrow, I will speak with the General Assembly." Looking forward to next week's UN General Debate, Ban said "one week from today we will gather at the highest level to mobilize political will to meet this extraordinary challenge."
The UN Security Council on Thursday unanimously adopted a resolution declaring the Ebola outbreak in West Africa "a threat to international peace and security." UN Secretary General Ban Ki moon, who oversaw the council's meeting on the virus outbreak, called on countries to provide urgent aid and resources to contain and treat the disease. "Ebola matters to us all," he said. "We cannot afford delays. The penalty for inaction is high. We need to race ahead of the outbreak and then turn and face it with all of our energy and strength." Resolution 2177 asked countries to "provide urgent assistance, including deployable medical capabilities such as field hospitals" and to provide "support capabilities for airlift." "Instead of isolating the affected countries, we call for flooding them flooding them with resources," said U.S. Ambassador to the UN Samantha Power. This is only the third resolution implemented by the council that addresses a public health crisis. The 15 member body adopted measures to address the HIV AIDS epidemic in 2000 and 2011. The council also urged nations with ties to the affected countries "to lift general travel and border restrictions, imposed as a result of the Ebola outbreak," as that would "contribute to the further isolation of the affected countries and undermine their efforts to respond." During the past six months, the Ebola virus has killed more than 2,400 people and affected more than 4,000 individuals, particularly in Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Nigeria and Senegal. The secretary general called this the worst Ebola outbreak on record and said that the number of Ebola infections were doubling every three weeks. "The gravity and scale of the situation now require a level of international action unprecedented for a health emergency," Ban said. The council heard from medical experts that efforts to contain the outbreak need to be three times bigger than the current response. Additionally, the United Nations is hoping to stop the spread of the disease within six to nine months. A General Assembly summit to discuss Ebola is scheduled for next week. Ban announced plans for a new UN mission to combat the outbreak. "Our best estimate is that we need a 20 fold increase in assistance," he said. "This is likely the greatest peace time challenge that the United Nations has ever faced," said Margaret Chan, director general of the World Health Organization. On Tuesday, President Obama announced that he will send 3,000 troops to West Africa to assist with the disaster response. "We have to act fast we can't dawdle on this one," the president said, adding that "this is a global threat, and it demands a truly global response." The military personnel will include medical, engineering, and security forces, and they have been charged with building 17 treatment centers in Liberia, shipping 10,000 sets of protective equipment and supplies, training healthcare workers, and assisting with security.
A health official waits to screen for the Ebola virus Muslim faithfuls on pilgrimage to Mecca on September 19, 2014 at the Murtala Mohammed International Airport in Lagos. Photo CFP Chinese President Xi Jinping has announced an aid package of 200 million yuan, or about 33 million U.S. dollars, for West African countries to combat Ebola. Making the announcement in India, President Xi said China will also provide the World Health Organization with 2 million dollars in cash and give the African Union the same amount. A 59 member Chinese laboratory team has already been dispatched to help Sierra Leone improve lab testing as part of the fight against Ebola. Previously, China has sent medical supplies and more than 100 medical experts to Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea Bissau. Meanwhile, the United Nations Security Council has adopted a resolution on Ebola, determining that the epidemic outbreak "constitutes a threat to international peace and security." It has decided to create a special mission to combat Ebola, deploying staff in the worst affected states. UN Secretary General Ban Ki moon. "This international mission, to be known as the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, or UNMEER, will have five priorities stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks." Thursday's resolution is the third ever on a health crisis by the Security Council, with previous ones adopted on HIV AIDS in 2000 and 2011.
Muslim pilgrims on their way to Mecca were tested for the Ebola virus at the Murtala Mohammed International Airport in Lagos today prior to their trip to the Islamic holy city. More than 200 Muslims from Oyo State in southwest Nigeria underwent stringent health checks by Nigerian health officials Nigeria is the only country in the region, which has been affected by Ebola that has clearance to send pilgrims to Saudi Arabia for the Hajj. Scroll down for video More than 700 more Ebola cases emerged in West Africa in one week, the World Health Organisation (WHO) has said, showing that the outbreak is accelerating. Just three weeks ago the number of new cases was around 500 for a seven day period. The number of people believed to have been killed is now more than 2,600, an increase of roughly 200 from the last estimate, the WHO said. Most deaths have been in Liberia. The new figures from the UN health agency show that the disease is thought to have affected more than 5,300 people. Just under half of those cases were recorded in the last three weeks. Some 318 healthcare workers have fallen ill, and about half have died. The outbreak has struck Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea, Nigeria and Senegal. Meanwhile, United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki moon says the number of Ebola cases is doubling every three weeks and is calling for a 20 fold increase in aid totalling almost 1billion to tackle the virus's worst ever outbreak over the next six months. The UN chief told an emergency meeting of the Security Council today that the Ebola epidemic in West Africa 'demands the attention of the world' and 'unprecedented' action. Ban announced that he is establishing a UN emergency mission to address the unprecedented challenge. He thanked U.S. President Barack Obama for sending 3,000 troops to provide expertise in training and engineering, read the names of about 20 other countries that have responded with contributions and urged all nations coming to the UN General Assembly ministerial meeting next week to follow suit. Aid workers attacked by people they went to help Six men trying to warn Guinea villagers of the dangers have been attacked by the people they were trying to help. The country's government have been sending aid workers to remote areas and on Tuesday six people three journalists and the director and two senior doctors of a regional hospital were assaulted at Womey in the district Nz r kor on Tuesday and have been missing since. To prevent more outsiders venturing to their homes, the villagers have destroyed all bridges leading to the area.
UNITED NATIONS Ban Ki moon, in his seventh year as the secretary general of the United Nations, has a full plate of unsolved problems, from a widening war in Syria to conflicts in the Central African Republic and South Sudan to say nothing of climate change. Now comes Ebola. For Mr. Ban, it represents a crucial test of leadership but also an opportunity. If he can be more effective in mobilizing world leaders to contain this calamity than he has in the others, it can serve as something akin to redemption. Or else it could leave a deep stain on his legacy. On Thursday, in an unusual move, the Security Council declared the Ebola epidemic in West Africa a threat to international peace and security, passing a resolution that calls on countries worldwide to send medical personnel and supplies urgently to contain the outbreak. Mr. Ban told the Council of his plans to set up an emergency mission to tackle the swiftly spreading disease, which has already killed more than 2,600 people in Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone. The new emergency mission would enable the United Nations to coordinate the world response to the outbreak, Mr. Ban said, adding that an advance team would be on the ground by the end of the month. On Friday, Mr. Ban is scheduled to brief the 193 member General Assembly on the mission. And he is convening a meeting of heads of state to discuss the Ebola response next Thursday, on the sidelines of the General Assembly session that begins next week. "Ebola matters to us all," Mr. Ban said Thursday at the Council session. "The gravity and scale of the situation now requires a level of international action unprecedented for a health emergency." Jean Marie Gu henno, a former senior United Nations official and now president of the International Crisis Group, noted both the possibilities and the perils facing Mr. Ban. "The secretary general is ideally placed to focus sustained attention on cross border challenges that overwhelm the capacities of any single state," he said by email. "The Ebola crisis is precisely such a challenge. And if it is neglected, the chances of state breakdown and violent upheaval could grow dramatically." Margaret Chan, the director general of the World Health Organization, called it the "greatest peacetime challenge" that the United Nations had faced. Ebola has devastated the economies of three fragile West African countries, spread panic and fear across much of the world, and taken a particularly devastating toll on health workers treating Ebola patients. "In some ways, Ebola is the perfect crisis to show why the U.N. matters Solving it will take the whole range of U.N. tools," including its tens of thousands of peacekeepers and experts on global health, said Richard Gowan, an associate director at New York University's Center on International Cooperation. "Ban can talk about it as a case study of why we need a strong U.N. and reliable global institutions, in contrast to a divisive political showdown like Ukraine." All the same, the crisis points precisely to the weaknesses of the world body. The United Nations has already come under withering criticism for not reacting more swiftly to the epidemic. The W.H.O., its main health agency, declared Ebola an international health emergency only in August, months after it had spread across borders, and it has been unable to handle the rise in infections. Mr. Ban is hamstrung on reacting to the Ebola crisis in obvious ways. He has no money, no standing army and no arsenal of field hospitals, doctors or nurses on hand. He relies on member states, and at the Council session on Thursday, he reiterated his plea for countries to contribute. The United Nations says tackling Ebola will cost at least 1 billion. The most poignant appeal came from a Liberian aid worker with Doctors Without Borders. "We are trying to treat as many people as we can, but there are not nearly enough treatment centers and patient beds," the worker, Jackson Niamah, told the Council by videolink. "We have to turn people away. And they are dying at our front door." Mr. Niamah appealed for helicopters, hospital beds and health experts. "I feel that the future of my country is hanging in the balance," he said. As diplomats spoke at the Council session, a Unicef official in Monrovia, the Liberian capital, said the country's Ebola hotline and ambulance services were so overstretched that five children were left at home alone with the corpses of their Ebola infected parents for three days. Some of the children were now hospitalized with symptoms of Ebola. The Security Council resolution reflects the attention that the United States has recently put into the effort. President Obama has pledged medicine, equipment and 3,000 military personnel to help Liberia, and the United States drafted the resolution and called the emergency session. "So to every country represented here, especially those still figuring out how they will respond, take this message back to your capitals, please," the American ambassador to the United Nations, Samantha Power, said. "The math is simple The sooner we act, the more of us that contribute, the more lives we save. "The United Nations was built for challenges like this."
London, Sep 19 (ANI) The United Nations Security Council has termed the Ebola outbreak in West Africa a "threat to international peace and security". Addressing an emergency meeting of the council, UN Secretary General Ban Ki moon warned that the number of people infected by the Ebola virus was doubling every three weeks, reported the BBC. The council unanimously adopted a resolution calling on states to supply more resources to fight the epidemic. The worst Ebola outbreak on record has claimed the lives of 2,600 people. (ANI)
The U.N. Security Council on Thursday declared the Ebola outbreak a threat to world peace and called on countries to provide urgent aid to West Africa, the epicenter of the growing crisis. The 15 member council unanimously adopted a resolution after U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki moon warned that the number of Ebola infections already more than 5,000 was doubling every three weeks, notably in Liberia. It was only the third resolution on a public health emergency to be approved in the history of the United Nations. The council voted on measures to address the AIDS pandemic in 2000 and 2011. The council heard a desperate appeal from Liberian medical aid worker Jackson Naimah for assistance to beat back the epidemic that has left at least 2,600 dead in West Africa. "Please send your helicopters, your centers, your beds and your expert personnel," said Naimah, speaking on video link from Monrovia. "We do not have the capacity to respond to this crisis. If the international community does not stand up, we will be wiped out." In its resolution, the council declared that the "unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak in Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and security" and warned that "peacebuilding gains... could be reversed" in West Africa. It called on countries to "provide urgent assistance, including deployable medical capabilities such as field hospitals" with staff and supplies, laboratories, clinics and to provide "support capabilities for airlift." The measure also urged nations to lift travel and border restrictions, and asked airlines and shipping companies to maintain their links with affected countries. World Health Organization director Margaret Chan said the Ebola outbreak is "likely the greatest peacetime challenge that the United Nations and its agencies have ever faced." The United Nations has said nearly 1 billion would be needed to defeat the worst ever outbreak of Ebola, which is on track to infect 20,000 people by the end of the year. Ban announced plans to set up a new U.N. mission to combat Ebola, with its headquarters in West Africa. "Our best estimate is that we need a 20 fold increase in assistance," he added. An "Ebola summit" is due to be held next week on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly to further mobilize aid and resources to fight the disease. The World Bank this week warned of a "potentially catastrophic blow" to the economies of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone with growth rates slashed and government revenues hit hard. Speaking on behalf of the medical aid organisation Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), Naimah described a crippling shortage of beds, forcing health care workers to turn away patients. "Right now, as I speak, people are sitting at the gates of our centers, literally begging for their lives," he said. The UN has set a goal of stopping the spread of Ebola within six to nine months but MSF has called the response so far "lethally inadequate." A special representative will be appointed soon by Ban to lead the Ebola crisis mission, which is to be the focal point for the international response to the epidemic. The United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER) will have its headquarters in the region, but not in the three most affected nations, where country offices will be opened.
The United Nations (UN) is set to deploy a mission to tackle the Ebola crisis in West Africa with France as the western country to support the move. France's President Francois Hollande on Thursday announced that they will send a military hospital to southeastern Guinea, the area where Ebola first broke out in March, Reuters relayed. The announcement comes as the UN Security Council declared the epidemic as a threat to the "peace and security" of the international community. The death toll of the infection also recently hit 2,630, with 5,357 recorded infections, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Most of the infected patients are from Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. However, the infection has now reached Nigeria and Senegal. The healthcare system of West Africa cannot cope with the level of action required in the situation, so Hollande said the US 194 million ( 150 million) worth of aid pledged by the European Union is not enough. "We must save lives," Hollande firmly said. "I have asked the defense minister to coordinate this action and to include military doctors and the civil protection agency plus air support." On Thursday, UN Secretary General Ban Ki moon vowed to organize a special mission for fighting the disease in the affected West African states called the UN Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The international mission's five priorities include stopping the epidemic, treating the patients, deliver the needed health services, maintain stability and prevent more infections, Ban enumerated. The Security Council also called on states to lift the travel bans implemented earlier due to the Ebola outbreak. The restrictions will only further isolate the affected states and limit response to those in need, the council explained. U.S. President Barack Obama pledged to send 3,000 soldiers to help stop the outbreak as he said the infection's threat to security has now gone global. Additionally, the UK promised to donate 700 hospital beds to Sierra Leone, a former British colony. Although there are several Ebola treatments and vaccines being developed, the deadly hemorrhagic disease still has no known cure, the report stated.
In an unprecedented action, an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council has declared the Ebola virus disease "a threat to international peace and security" while Secretary General Ban Ki moon announced the formation of an emergency mission to fight the deadly disease. The Council, which usually deals with international conflicts, took on the disease ravaging three countries in West Africa, and approved a resolution Thursday sponsored by 131 countries "determining that the unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak in Africa constitute a threat to international peace and security". Underlining the international concern over the disease with no vaccine available and cures rare, it was the largest number of sponsors ever for a resolution in the Security Council. The Council president, US Ambassador Samantha Power, said this was the Council's first emergency meeting on a public health issue. Ban announced at the Council meeting the formation of the new organisation to take on the disease on a battle footing. "To be known as the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, or UNMEER," he said, it "will have five priorities stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks." He appealed for international aid for the effort, not only from governments, but also busineses. The UN has estimated that it would need 1 billion over the next six months to deal with the crisis. Ban also called for ending travel and trade restrictions on three affected countries Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leon as these could affect medical personnel going there and delivery of supplies. The Council resolution took up the issue, expressing concern about major airlines and shipping companies introducing travel restrictions to the affected countries. World Health Organisation head Margaret Chan told the Council that reports Ebola has affected more than 5,500 people and killed over 2,500 killed are "vast underestimates". "None of us experienced in containing outbreaks has ever seen, in our lifetimes, an emergency on this scale, with this degree of suffering and with this magnitude of cascading consequences," she said. Earlier, at a press briefing, a reporter asked the secretary general's spokesman about a potential threat of terrorists using Ebola. The spokesman said it was a matter of concern. "It can also impact the political stability of a country and lack of political stability can breed other problems. So, this is why, I think, the secretary general is focused on getting the UN system to work together in the most efficient way possible to stop the virus from spreading and to support national governments.
Secretary General Opens Meeting with Briefings by United Nations Coordinator for Ebola, World Health Organization, M decins Sans Fronti res Determining that the "unprecedented extent" of the Ebola outbreak in Africa constituted a threat to international peace and security, the Security Council this afternoon called on Member States to respond urgently to the crisis and to refrain from isolating the affected countries. Resolution 2177 (2014) was adopted unanimously during a meeting that heard a statement from United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki moon and briefings by the Senior United Nations System Coordinator for Ebola, David Nabarro, the Director General of the World Health Organization (WHO), Margaret Chan, and a M decins Sans Fronti res health worker, Jackson K.P. Niamah, via video teleconference from Liberia. Through the resolution, the Council requested the Secretary General to ensure that all relevant United Nations sections accelerated their response to the outbreak, encouraging the World Health Organization (WHO) to strengthen its technical leadership and operational support to Governments and other partners in that effort. The Council encouraged the Governments of the heavily affected countries of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea to speed up the establishment of national mechanisms to deal with the crisis providing for rapid diagnosis, quarantine, treatment and public education and to coordinate efficient utilization of international assistance, including health workers and relief supplies. It called on countries to lift border restrictions on the affected countries that led to their isolation, saying that such measures could undermine their efforts to respond to the crisis, calling also on transport companies to maintain links. Commending the commitment of international health and humanitarian relief workers to respond to the Ebola crisis, it called on all relevant actors to put in place necessary arrangements, including medical evacuation capacities, to facilitate their immediate deployment to the affected countries. Opening this afternoon's meeting, Secretary General Ban expressed appreciation for those on the front lines, but stressed the unprecedented scope of the situation. "The gravity and scale of the situation now requires a level of international action unprecedented for an emergency," he said. For that reason, he said he had decided to establish an emergency health mission, to be called the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, or UNMEER, which aimed at stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks. UNMEER, he explained, would draw on the capacities of many partners and work closely with regional organizations. To be effective, however, the resulting response, it was estimated, had to be scaled up some 20 times from current efforts. "We need to race ahead of the outbreak and then turn to face it with all our energy and strength," he concluded. Mr. Nabarro said that the response was falling behind because the disease was advancing at an "exponential" pace that had already doubled since his appointment. Agreeing with the Secretary General's approach, he added that the assistance must go beyond health to fill such gaps in areas such as food and supplies, whose delivery had been interrupted in the affected countries. Ms. Chan called attention to the WHO's Ebola Response Roadmap, where the most urgent needs had been set out along with 12 critical actions to be carried out by the special United Nations mission. Mr. Niamah, a team leader in a M decins Sans Fronti res treatment centre in Monrovia, Liberia, spoke of the deaths of fellow health workers and issued an impassioned plea for help. "Right now, as I speak, people are sitting at the gates of our centres, literally begging for their lives," he said. "We are trying to treat as many people as we can but there are not nearly enough treatment centres and patient beds," he added. Following those briefings and the adoption of the resolution, some 45 speakers took the floor, concurring with the assessment of the Secretary General and Security Council of the severity of the Ebola threat, and echoing the call for international solidarity. Most speakers welcomed the United Nations coordination role in support of the affected countries and voiced approval for the Mission. The Foreign Ministers of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone paid tribute to the health workers from their countries and those who had come from abroad and noted that the deaths of doctors had added to the climate of fear. They thanked those countries that had announced additional aid and welcomed the Council's call for an end to the restrictions that were hurting their countries. "Ebola was not the making of any of our countries," Sierra Leone's Minister said. "With all of our help, we hope it will go back where it came." Many speakers, such as the representatives of Luxembourg and Argentina, stressed the vulnerable condition of the affected countries, which lacked viable health services. They urged that the situation be addressed by the entire United Nations system, including the Peacebuilding Commission. Argentina's representative said the situation was the result of severe global inequality. The representative of the United States, noting her country's announcement of a large scale initiative to provide assistance, said that 130 countries had co sponsored the resolution the most ever but such concern would have no effect if an enormous increase in help was not forthcoming. In that context, many speakers reported on the assistance they had so far provided and also announced new pledges. The Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba also spoke. Also speaking were the representatives of Nigeria, France, Rwanda, Russian Federation, Republic of Korea, Lithuania, China, Australia, United Kingdom, Luxembourg, Chad, Jordan, Chile, Brazil, Morocco, Switzerland, Turkey, Canada, Japan, Netherlands, Sweden, Israel, Uruguay, Spain, Italy, Burundi, Estonia, Norway, Botswana, New Zealand, Malaysia, Germany, Colombia, Nicaragua, Mali, Senegal, Guyana, United Republic of Tanzania and Equatorial Guinea. The head of the European Union Delegation and the Permanent Observer of the African Union also spoke. "Recalling its resolution 2176 (2014) adopted on 15 September 2014 concerning the situation in Liberia and its press statement of 9 July 2014, "Recalling its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, "Expressing grave concern about the outbreak of the Ebola virus in, and its impact on, West Africa, in particular Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone, as well as Nigeria and beyond, "Recognizing that the peacebuilding and development gains of the most affected countries concerned could be reversed in light of the Ebola outbreak and underlining that the outbreak is undermining the stability of the most affected countries concerned and, unless contained, may lead to further instances of civil unrest, social tensions and a deterioration of the political and security climate, "Determining that the unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak in Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and security, "Expressing concern about the particular impact of the Ebola outbreak on women, "Welcoming the convening of the Mano River Union Extraordinary Summit, held in Guinea on 1 August 2014, and the commitments expressed by the Heads of State of C te d'Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone to combat the Ebola outbreak in the region, including by strengthening treatment services and measures to isolate the outbreak across borders, "Taking note of the measures taken by the Member States of the region, especially Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone, as well as Nigeria, C te d'Ivoire and Senegal, in response to the Ebola outbreak and recognizing that the outbreak may exceed the capacity of the governments concerned to respond, "Taking note of the letter (S 2014 669) dated 29 August 2014 to the Secretary General from the Presidents of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, requesting a comprehensive response to the Ebola outbreak, including a coordinated international response to end the outbreak and to support the societies and economies affected by restrictions on trade and transportation during the outbreak, "Recognizing the measures taken by the Member States of the region, in particular C te d'Ivoire, Cabo Verde, Ghana, Mali and Senegal, to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the most affected countries, "Emphasizing the key role of Member States, including through the Global Health Security Agenda where applicable, to provide adequate public health services to detect, prevent, respond to and mitigate outbreaks of major infectious diseases through sustainable, well functioning and responsive public health mechanisms, "Recalling the International Health Regulations (2005), which are contributing to global public health security by providing a framework for the coordination of the management of events that may constitute a public health emergency of international concern, and aim to improve the capacity of all countries to detect, assess, notify and respond to public health threats and underscoring the importance of WHO Member States abiding by these commitments, "Underscoring that the control of outbreaks of major infectious diseases requires urgent action and greater national, regional and international collaboration and, in this regard, stressing the crucial and immediate need for a coordinated international response to the Ebola outbreak, "Commending Member States, bilateral partners and multilateral organizations for the crucial assistance, including financial commitments and in kind donations, provided to and identified for the affected people and governments of the region to support the scaling up of emergency efforts to contain the Ebola outbreak in West Africa and interrupt transmission of the virus, including by providing flexible funds to relevant United Nations agencies and international organizations involved in the response to enable them and national governments to purchase supplies and enhance emergency operations in the affected countries, as well as by collaborating with public and private sector partners to accelerate development of therapies, vaccines and diagnostics to treat patients and limit or prevent further infection or transmission of the Ebola virus disease, "Expressing deep appreciation to the first line responders to the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, including national and international health and humanitarian relief workers contributed by the Member States of diverse regions and non governmental organizations such as M decins Sans Fronti res (MSF) and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) and also expressing appreciation to the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) for transporting humanitarian personnel and medical supplies and equipment, especially to remote locations in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, during the outbreak, "Welcoming the efforts of the African Union (AU), in coordination with bilateral partners and multilateral organizations, to craft a united, comprehensive and collective African response to the outbreak, including through the deployment of healthcare workers to the region, and also the efforts of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to support steps to contain the spread of the Ebola virus, including through the support of the defense forces of its Member States, "Expressing concern about the impact, including on food security, of general travel and trade restrictions in the region and taking note of the AU call on its Member States to lift travel restrictions to enable the free movement of people and trade to the affected countries, "Emphasizing the role of all relevant United Nations System entities, in particular the United Nations General Assembly, Economic and Social Council, and Peacebuilding Commission, in supporting the national, regional and international efforts to respond to the Ebola outbreak and recognizing, in this regard, the central role of the World Health Organization (WHO), which designated the Ebola outbreak a public health emergency of international concern, "Stressing the need for coordinated efforts of all relevant United Nations System entities to address the Ebola outbreak in line with their respective mandates and to assist, wherever possible, national, regional and international efforts in this regard, "Taking note of the WHO Ebola Response Roadmap of 28 August 2014 that aims to stop transmission of the Ebola virus disease worldwide, while managing the consequences of any further international spread and also taking note of the 12 Mission Critical Actions, including infection control, community mobilization and recovery, to resolve the Ebola outbreak, "Taking note of the WHO protocols to prevent the transmission of the Ebola virus disease between individuals, organizations and populations, underlining that the Ebola outbreak can be contained, including through the implementation of established safety and health protocols and other preventive measures that have proven effective and commending the efforts of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to communicate, including through UNMIL Radio, such protocols and preventive measures to the Liberian public, "Reiterating its appreciation for the appointments by the Secretary General of David Nabarro as the United Nations System Senior Coordinator for Ebola Virus Disease and of Anthony Banbury as the Deputy Ebola Coordinator and Operation Crisis Manager operating from the Crisis Response Mechanism of the United Nations, activated on 5 September 2014 and which aims to consolidate the operational work of the United Nations System, Member States, non governmental organizations and other partners focused on providing assistance to the affected countries in response to the Ebola outbreak, as well as to ensure United Nations System assistance to developing, leading and implementing an effective response to the broader dimensions of the outbreak that include food security and access to basic health services, "Welcoming the intention of the Secretary General to convene a high level meeting on the margins of the sixty ninth United Nations General Assembly to urge an exceptional and vigorous response to the Ebola outbreak, "1. Encourages the governments of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea to accelerate the establishment of national mechanisms to provide for the rapid diagnosis and isolation of suspected cases of infection, treatment measures, effective medical services for responders, credible and transparent public education campaigns, and strengthened preventive and preparedness measures to detect, mitigate and respond to Ebola exposure, as well as to coordinate the rapid delivery and utilization of international assistance, including health workers and humanitarian relief supplies, as well as to coordinate their efforts to address the transnational dimension of the Ebola outbreak, including the management of their shared borders, and with the support of bilateral partners, multilateral organizations and the private sector "2. Encourages the governments of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea to continue efforts to resolve and mitigate the wider political, security, socio economic and humanitarian dimensions of the Ebola outbreak, as well as to provide sustainable, well functioning and responsive public health mechanisms, emphasizes that responses to the Ebola outbreak should address the specific needs of women and stresses the importance of their full and effective engagement in the development of such responses "3. Expresses concern about the detrimental effect of the isolation of the affected countries as a result of trade and travel restrictions imposed on and to the affected countries "4. Calls on Member States, including of the region, to lift general travel and border restrictions, imposed as a result of the Ebola outbreak, and that contribute to the further isolation of the affected countries and undermine their efforts to respond to the Ebola outbreak and also calls on airlines and shipping companies to maintain trade and transport links with the affected countries and the wider region "5. Calls on Member States, especially of the region, to facilitate the delivery of assistance, including qualified, specialized and trained personnel and supplies, in response to the Ebola outbreak to the affected countries and, in this regard, expresses deep appreciation to the government of Ghana for allowing the resumption of the air shuttle of UNMIL from Monrovia to Accra, which will transport international health workers and other responders to areas affected by the Ebola outbreak in Liberia "6. Calls on Member States, especially of the region, and all relevant actors providing assistance in response to the Ebola outbreak, to enhance efforts to communicate to the public, as well as to implement, the established safety and health protocols and preventive measures to mitigate against misinformation and undue alarm about the transmission and extent of the outbreak among and between individuals and communities and, in this regard, requests the Secretary General to develop a strategic communication platform using existing United Nations System resources and facilities in the affected countries, as necessary and available, including to assist governments and other relevant partners "7. Calls on Member States to provide urgent resources and assistance, including deployable medical capabilities such as field hospitals with qualified and sufficient expertise, staff and supplies, laboratory services, logistical, transport and construction support capabilities, airlift and other aviation support and aeromedical services and dedicated clinical services in Ebola Treatment Units and isolation units, to support the affected countries in intensifying preventive and response activities and strengthening national capacities in response to the Ebola outbreak and to allot adequate capacity to prevent future outbreaks "8. Urges Member States, as well as bilateral partners and multilateral organizations, including the AU, ECOWAS, and European Union, to mobilize and provide immediately technical expertise and additional medical capacity, including for rapid diagnosis and training of health workers at the national and international level, to the affected countries, and those providing assistance to the affected countries, and to continue to exchange expertise, lessons learned and best practices, as well as to maximize synergies to respond effectively and immediately to the Ebola outbreak, to provide essential resources, supplies and coordinated assistance to the affected countries and implementing partners and calls on all relevant actors to cooperate closely with the Secretary General on response assistance efforts "9. Urges Member States to implement relevant Temporary Recommendations issued under the International Health Regulations (2005) regarding the 2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa, and lead the organization, coordination and implementation of national preparedness and response activities, including, where and when relevant, in collaboration with international development and humanitarian partners "10. Commends the continued contribution and commitment of international health and humanitarian relief workers to respond urgently to the Ebola outbreak and calls on all relevant actors to put in place the necessary repatriation and financial arrangements, including medical evacuation capacities and treatment and transport provisions, to facilitate their immediate and unhindered deployment to the affected countries "11. Requests the Secretary General to help to ensure that all relevant United Nations System entities, including the WHO and UNHAS, in accordance with their respective mandates, accelerate their response to the Ebola outbreak, including by supporting the development and implementation of preparedness and operational plans and liaison and collaboration with governments of the region and those providing assistance "12. Encourages the WHO to continue to strengthen its technical leadership and operational support to governments and partners, monitor Ebola transmission, assist in identifying existing response needs and partners to meet those needs to facilitate the availability of essential data and hasten the development and implementation of therapies and vaccines according to best clinical and ethical practices and also encourages Member States to provide all necessary support in this regard, including the sharing of data in accordance with applicable law United Nations Secretary General BAN KI MOON said that the Ebola crisis had evolved into a complex emergency, with significant political, social, economic, humanitarian and security dimensions. The number of cases was doubling every three weeks, and the suffering and spillover effects in the region and beyond demanded the attention of the entire world. "Ebola matters to us all," he said. He applauded what he called the courageous actions of Governments, communities and individuals on the front lines, including local health workers, M decins Sans Fronti res, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), and United Nations entities. However, he warned, "the gravity and scale of the situation now requires a level of international action unprecedented for an emergency." Noting that the leaders of the affected countries had asked the United Nations to coordinate the global response, he pledged the Organization's commitment and affirmed that the World Health Organization (WHO) was working to identify the best epidemiological response. He had also activated, for the first time, the system wide crisis response mechanism and, under Anthony Banbury, an Ebola Response Centre was operational. Ghana and the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) were supporting an air bridge in Accra to facilitate aid delivery and the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service was operating between countries. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World Food Programme (WFP) and UN Volunteers were actively bringing in supplies and expertise. Despite such efforts, the spread was outpacing the response, he said, requiring stepped up international coordination. For that reason, he had decided to establish a United Nations emergency health mission, to be known as the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, or UNMEER, aimed at stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks. It would draw on the capacities of many partners and work closely with regional organizations. The goal was to have the Mission's advance team on the ground before the end of the month. Effectiveness would depend on the international community's support, he said, with an estimated 20 fold increase in assistance needed. The United Nations had outlined a set of critical needs early in the week totalling almost 1 billion over the next few months. He applauded United States President Barack Obama's announcement of a deployment of 3,000 troops. Listing a number of countries that had made contributions, he voiced hope that other countries would follow suit. "The penalty for inaction is high," he said, adding, "We need to race ahead of the outbreak and then turn to face it with all our energy and strength." Briefings DAVID NABARRO, Senior United Nations System Coordinator for Ebola, said that since having been appointed in August to head the response to the outbreak in West Africa, he had visited most affected countries twice and met with many officials and key stakeholders. The disease was advancing at an "exponential" pace. Describing that via a graph, he said the line showed a rapid upward acceleration, which was doubling every three weeks. That meant the pace had already doubled since his appointment, he added. He said the response was also increasing apace, with Governments and non governmental organizations making contributions to the control effort. Nevertheless, the spread of the disease was outpacing the "linear" response. With the passage of time, it would become harder to get the disease under control. He estimated that to get ahead of the Ebola, the response must be 20 times greater than it was now. Twelve different critical actions must be put in place to properly deal with the emergency, he said, while welcoming the Secretary General's strategy, which included five key elements of response. Although the medical part of the strategy was important, there was also a need to restore basic services and to provide food as well as support for household income, which had dropped drastically since the outbreak of the disease. Massively scaled up response was vital not only for affected countries but also for the world, he said, welcoming the strong commitment of support announced by the European Union, United States, United Kingdom, Cuba, China and other Governments. He also commended the efforts of Valerie Amos, United Nations Under Secretary General and Emergency Relief Coordinator. But all those responses must be coordinated effectively and all players must work in synergy, he said. MARGARET CHAN, Director General of the World Health Organization (WHO), stressed the urgent need to catch up to the fast moving, deadly Ebola outbreak in a pragmatic way. In the hardest hit countries, a burgeoning caseload threatened to push Governments to the brink of State failure. "This is likely the greatest peacetime challenge that the United Nations and its agencies have ever faced," she said, pointing to the unprecedented scale of the emergency, degree of suffering and magnitude of consequences. "This is not just an outbreak. This is not just a public crisis. This is a social crisis, a humanitarian crisis, an economic crisis, and a threat to national security well beyond the outbreak zones," she said. This week, she noted, the World Bank Group had warned of a "potentially catastrophic blow" to the hardest hit countries' economies. In Liberia alone, nearly 170 farmers and family members in fertile Lofa county the nation's breadbasket had died from Ebola. Ms. Chan said that for those reasons she and the Secretary General were calling for a system wide initiative pooling the assets of all relevant United Nations agencies and for an immediate, massive increase in support. The most urgent needs had been set forth in WHO's Ebola Response Roadmap and in the 12 critical actions to be carried out by a special United Nations mission recently launched in Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone to combat the disease. She welcomed the announcements of a massive increase in support from the United States and United Kingdom, saying that was a "clarion call" for other countries to follow suit. The fact that that those two nations, as well as China, Cuba and others, were using a variety of assets, among them the military, illustrated the complexity of the challenge. That surge of support could turn things around for the estimated 22 million people in the hardest hit countries. The scale of deployment to Africa of WHO and international staff under its "outbreak umbrella" was unprecedented in United Nations history. "Everything now is unprecedented. Everything now is happening faster than ever before. The needs are immense and we know it," she said, pointing to reports that more than 5,500 people had been infected and far more than 2,500 had died. Those figures were vast underestimates, she added, stressing that health, medical and clinical care issues must remain the core of the response. "It will take some time, but the Ebola outbreak can be contained," she said. She said that when the first two cases of Ebola infection entered Nigeria and Senegal, those Governments, with the support of WHO, the United States Center for Disease Control, and M decins Sans Fronti res stabilized the situation by responding immediately with the right emergency actions. As people constantly criss crossed West Africa's porous borders, other countries would have to address imported cases in the same aggressive way. JACKSON K.P. NIAMAH, a physician's assistant and representative of M decins Sans Fronti res, speaking via video link from Monrovia, welcomed United States President Barack Obama's Ebola response plan and expressed hope it would be implemented immediately. He called on all Member States to mobilize their capacities as well. With every passing day, the epidemic spread and destroyed more lives. Because there was no cure for Ebola, his organization's treatment centre in Monrovia, which he headed, provided food, hydration and basic treatment of symptoms. Early treatment greatly improved a patient's chance of survival, he added. "We are trying to treat as many people as we can, but there are not enough treatment centres and patient beds. We have to turn people away. And they are dying at our front door," he said. "Right now, as I speak, people are sitting at the gates of our centres, literally begging for their lives. They rightly feel alone, neglected, denied left to die a horrible, undignified death." The health care community was failing the sick and not properly preventing the spread of the virus due to a lack of help on the ground, he said, stressing, "we urgently need to get the disease under control, and we urgently need your help." Contact tracing, or following up every person who had contact with an infected person or one who had died from the virus, was vital, as was raising awareness about the disease in the face of much denial. More care centres were needed for sick people to prevent them from staying at home and risking infecting their families. It was also vital to train medical staff in proper procedures in order to keep the centres and other health services running, and make sure it was safe for health care staff to return to work. Too many health workers and ambulance drivers arrived at the centres as patients. "Please send your helicopters, your centres, your beds, and your expert personnel. But know that we also need the basics," he said, adding that many homes in Monrovia still lacked soap, water and buckets simple things that could help curb the virus' spread. Ebola had affected every aspect of life schools and universities had shut down, as had civil services, he noted. "I feel the future of my country is hanging in the balance," he went on, calling on Member States to set an example to their peers nations with the resources, assets and skills required to stop the Ebola catastrophe. "We do not have the capacity to respond to this crisis on our own. If the international community does not stand up, we will be wiped out. We need your help. We need it now," he said. Statements SAMANTHA POWER (United States) said the Security Council's resolution represented a call for action to face this unprecedented threat. "Looking away will not make this threat go away." Besides, as the world was not prepared for the scope of the outbreak, the first reaction to seal off the effected countries had been counter productive. Instead of isolating the affected countries, they should flood them with assistance, she said, noting her country's announcement of the deployment of 3,000 troops, the establishment of training centres and the provision of logistics. Hopefully, many other countries would announce additional aid today, she said, stressing that help from all sectors was required. She noted that today's resolution had 130 co sponsors, the most in history, but said that if it did not result in adequate action, it would not stem the projected "steep, terrifying curve". With that, she said, "We must bend the curve", as she appealed for contributions of everything, from health centres to buckets. USMAN SARKI (Nigeria) said that today's debate and Council resolution underscored the seriousness with which the international community viewed the threat to his region and the world. He concurred with the Secretary General on the gravity of the crisis. Personnel, clean water, generators, ambulances and fuel, and a range of other needs were great. His country's experience showed that the epidemic could be stemmed. He agreed that the affected countries should not be cut off from the outside world his country had been active in providing resources and training. It would remain vigilant, however, at its borders and continue to provide assistance to its neighbours. FRAN OIS DELATTRE (France) said that the Ebola crisis was indeed a threat to international peace and security, particularly because some of the countries affected were just emerging from conflict. His country stood side by side with the United Nations and the affected countries in combating the disease. He noted scientific work that had been done at France's Pasteur Institute and announced resources that would be sent to affected countries, focused on Guinea, as had been requested. He also announced assistance that would be provided through the European Union. The disease could be contained if the correct, systematic response was followed and comprehensive assistance was given to affected States. He quoted Albert Schweitzer on the need for world solidarity with the sufferers. OLIVIER NDUHUNGIREHE (Rwanda) was pleased with the prompt international response noting, in particular that of WHO and the United Nations system as a whole. He welcomed establishment of a United Nations mission for the emergency response to Ebola. He highlighted the debate's relevance to the Council's peace and security mandate it was clearly justified, including because the gains made through peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts were fragile and put at great risk by Ebola. The mobilization of regional organizations and institutions like the African Development Bank were positive steps, and he noted the donations made by Rwanda. The deployment of 3,000 troops from the United States and its other contributions were positive steps. Efforts must be intensified to raise awareness. The African Union should speak out against the cancellation of flights to affected countries as that harmed their economies and hampered delivery of humanitarian aid. DMITRY I. MAKSIMYCHEV (Russian Federation) underlined his concern at the rapid spread and consequences of Ebola. Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone urgently needed international support. He singled out the early contributions made by Cuba and M decins Sans Fronti res. The Russian Federation had also contributed bilaterally and multilaterally, financing medical modules through WHO to treat 60,000 people. A specialist Russian anti epidemic brigade had been deployed to Guinea, which was assisting the Health Ministry in organizing activities to stem the epidemic and diagnose the virus. Personal protection equipment would be dispatched for health care volunteers and food assistance would be given to the three most affected countries. The virus was being studied in the Russian Federation, with trials for treatment, and he was ready to supply laboratories in the area of the outbreak. However, helping the sick was vital, but it was only part of the problem. The disease would continue to spread without proper prophylactics and awareness raising efforts in affected countries. OH JOON (Republic of Korea) stressed that the discussion fell within the remit of peace and security because it was "unravelling societies and threatening gains" made through international peacebuilding. The risks were substantial and a coordinated international response was needed to tackle a preventable and controllable epidemic. A global level response was needed, for which the United Nations was the best platform. The Organization should strengthen its response systems and direct streams of aid to curb the disease's spread. Proactive regional cooperation was also needed to stop the spread, while at the same time borders should be kept open. Isolating affected countries was not the correct approach, and he was happy that Ghana would serve as a logistics hub to help get personnel and equipment to the affected areas. Peacekeeping missions could also help, he said, adding that UNMIL had been instrumental and a reminder of the United Nations commitment to its overriding goal of protecting people. RAIMONDA MURMOKAIT (Lithuania) said that the Ebola outbreak was a test of international solidarity and its readiness to respond to unconventional threats, which, if unchecked, could be as devastating as any conflict. For each day the response was delayed, the cost and the suffering would grow exponentially, as noted in the Secretary General's report. She welcomed the strong political commitment shown by the Mano River Union and the African Union. For its part, the European Union was working on a comprehensive response to the Ebola epidemic and had already pledged some 149 million euros for affected West African nations. Her delegation supported the Council resolution on Ebola proposed by the United States. WANG MIN (China) said that given the severity of the outbreak, the international community should provide rapid assistance to the affected countries. He supported the United Nations leading role in coordinating assistance through the proposed Mission and relevant agencies. Long term health needs should be addressed along with the response to the Ebola virus, since the gaps in care helped foment such epidemics. China was sharing its experience in epidemic control and sending resources and expertise to the affected countries, as well as to WHO and the African Union. He hoped that a ramped up global effort would stop the threat and allow the affected countries to return to development. GARY FRANCIS QUINLAN (Australia) said that the Ebola outbreak had transformed into much more than a health crisis with grave humanitarian, economic and social consequences that could spread far beyond the affected countries. The blanket border and travel restrictions being imposed across the region to contain the outbreak were having a paradoxical effect making it more difficult to fly in medical staff and supplies, and restricting trade and transportation links. His country this week had announced an additional 7 million in assistance, including for the WHO consolidated regional response and to support the provision of front line medical services. MARK LYALL GRANT (United Kingdom) said that Ebola was preventable and containable, but only if the international community acted with urgency and provided assistance not only to those countries already affected but also to those at risk. He described his country's announced package of support for Sierra Leone, funding hundreds of beds along with the personnel to staff the endeavour, as well as its assistance through multilateral institutions. He called for particular attention to women during the epidemic and on all countries to join the global coalition against Ebola before the crisis became a catastrophe. SYLVIE LUCAS (Luxembourg), associating herself with the statement of the European Union, concurred with the gravity of the threat and the need for a commensurate response as well as for the United Nations to play a coordinating role. She said that the new Mission should assist countries not yet affected to prevent the spread. Luxembourg had already provided much assistance and was considering further contributions. Along with fighting Ebola, it was critical to address the structural weaknesses of the countries involved, she said, pledging to work with other countries active in the country specific configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission for that purpose. MAHAMAT ZENE CHERIF (Chad) said the Ebola outbreak added to the dire effects of climate change and terrorism in Africa, threatening peace and security across the continent. The epidemic was far more than just a public health crisis. Socioeconomic measures to limit air and sea travel to and from affected countries had dire effects because they reduced economic activity in many sectors. Liberia's situation illustrated the need for special measures. The African Union Peace and Security Council had called for steps to prevent the isolation of affected countries. He welcomed Ghana's air bridge to help deliver the humanitarian response. The Council meeting showed the growing global awareness of the situation, a struggle likely to cost at least 1 billion. He paid tribute to the team sent by the African Union and the contributions made by several countries, including Cuba and Pakistan, as well as the efforts of the World Bank. MARIA CRISTINA PERCEVAL (Argentina) said the Council had met before on a public health issue, dealing with the implications for public security of the spread of HIV AIDS. Without an urgent response to Ebola, the living conditions of people around the world could be impacted. Urgency and commitment were needed as was an ethical institutional response. It was not just a health problem, it was a "multidimensional reality" that had the potential to "kill the present and wound the future". The epicentre of the epidemic was in an area recently blighted by conflict and the outbreak hit just as people there were looking to the future. It was essential to work with the United Nations to address the outbreak's causes and consequences. The General Assembly should take responsibility for the response to the Secretary General's proposal to create a mission in the region. The outbreak could have been better handled with better health care systems. The epidemic showed the role of inequality and economic injustice in spreading the disease. DINA KAWAR (Jordan) said Ebola's spread showed the need to establish methods to deal with the epidemic. Such an epidemic had never been seen before and the challenge of Ebola appeared just as the affected countries had restored political stability after many years of trying. Health care workers faced an incredibly dangerous situation, caring for the sick and burying the dead. Meanwhile, the economic and social impact of the disease was also very dangerous. He described Jordan's role in Liberia, including the deployment of 200 police elements and observers to help stem the epidemic. The United Nations must coordinate exceptional measures. She commended the Secretary General's efforts to establish an emergency mission to try to stem the epidemic's spread. Affected Governments required continued assistance. CRISTI N BARROS MELET (Chile) said WHO had identified the Ebola outbreak as an "international public health emergency." The affected countries were dealing with an unprecedented number of victims, which had doubled in the last 21 days, undermining their socioeconomic stability. As the three most affected countries pushed ahead with peacebuilding efforts, the disease's outbreak undermined their efforts and posed a threat to international peace and security that was more than simply armed conflict. As such, the Council was bound to act and take decisions to help the affected people tackle the emergencies. That had to be done in a coordinated way in order to optimize resources and ensure no duplication finding effective measures to break the chain of transmission of the disease was crucial. Awareness raising was important to help prevent stigmatization and multisectoral responses were needed to stem the disease's spread. Air and sea services should not be interrupted, as that would increase the negative economic consequences and hamper the ability of affected countries to deal with the disease. AUGUSTINE KPEHE NGAFUAN, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia, said that even before the Ebola outbreak, his country was grappling with herculean challenges in such areas as productive employment, especially among youth, some of whom are former combatants, as well as in rule of law and security sector reform. The country had been making valiant efforts to comply with regional protocols aimed at curbing the spread of small arms and light weapons and transnational crime, but the disease had distracted national attention from those priorities and gravely undermined its ability to address them. The impact of the Ebola outbreak, he continued, had been multidimensional, negatively affecting all sectors of Liberia's economy and effectively arresting the nation's progress. A preliminary assessment indicated a 3.4 per cent decline in real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, from the previously projected 5.9 per cent to a low of 2.5 per cent. The mining, agriculture and services sectors were expected to bear the greatest brunt of the crisis. The global community could not remain passive. "We cannot sit idly and watch, as we would do watching a movie on our TV screen," he said, adding that the reality did not have a pre determined climax. FRAN OIS LOUNC NY FALL, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Guinea, said the unanimous adoption of the Council resolution showed the clear need for a global solution to a scourge that was a genuine threat to peace and security in West Africa and therefore to collective security. The disease had a severe economic impact and it could affect all sectors. It had the potential to slice 2.5 per cent from gross domestic product (GDP) in the affected countries, which would seriously undermine their development efforts. A humanitarian crisis loomed unless measures were taken, which was particularly bad news for the three countries most affected, all of whom were on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission. It was vital not to isolate affected countries, even while trying hard to isolate and eradicate the disease itself. Multilateral and bilateral partners were caring for victims and working to eradicate the virus from Guinea, he said, noting that his Government had also been deeply involved in the response. The outbreak appeared to have been controlled in May but new cases emerged in June, with a spread to other countries and the onset of a subregional crisis. Women were most affected. The National Epidemic Management Committee carried out accelerated responses for two to six months focused on security, prevention and screening at borders. Other action on the ground was ongoing, including the strengthening, monitoring and tracking of the disease, the establishment of management committees and efforts to ensure proper burial of the dead. Outreach efforts sought to alter the perception of the disease on the ground, especially in rural areas. Despite ongoing efforts, challenges to meeting people's needs and to stem the outbreak remained. A variety of medical equipment was needed, including ambulances. He thanked doctors who had travelled to the region to assist. SAMURA KAMARA, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone, said that the cumulative figure of confirmed Ebola cases in his country stood at 1,571 with 483 people dead. The nature of the virus was such that it even had claimed the lives of people trained medically to deliver health care. To date, more than 34 courageous medical personnel, including four doctors, had lost their lives while saving the lives of their compatriots. That had contributed to the culture of fear, which had created further difficulties for responding to non Ebola diseases as most private clinics and hospitals had scaled back operations. The outbreak, he noted, came at a time when Sierra Leone had achieved tremendous progress in rebuilding its State institutions and strengthening democratic governance. The withdrawal of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Mission in March, after an internationally acclaimed success story, was a testament to the progress made. With Ebola, economic disruptions had already been felt, and inflation, which had declined from 12 per cent in December 2012 to 6.5 per cent in April 2014 the first single digit rate in five years was now on an upward trend, approaching 8 per cent due to concerns about the food supply. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) had estimated gross domestic product (GDP) would drop by 3.3 points from 11 to 8 per cent. ABELARDO MORENO, Vice Minister for Foreign Relations, Cuba, said that in answer to the call issued by WHO and the Secretary General, his country was sending a medical brigade to the region and was ready to work side by side with other countries, including those with which it did not have diplomatic relations. Such a contribution was a continuation of Cuba's widespread medical assistance in Africa and the Caribbean and its training of doctors from 120 countries. The Cuban response was an expression of solidarity engendered by the Cuban revolution. "Humanity has a debt to the people of Africa," he said, "We cannot let them down. GUILHERME DE AGUIAR PATRIOTA (Brazil) announced that his country had shipped emergency supply kits to support local efforts in Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone, in coordination with the WHO. They accounted for a three month supply for a total of about 7,000 people. Additionally, Brazil had announced an initial donation of 450,000 to assist WHO's efforts to curb the virus. President Dilma Rousseff had authorized a donation, on an exceptional basis, of thousands of tons of rice and beans to the three affected nations through the World Food Programme. The Peacebuilding Commission, which he chaired, had adopted a statement after its meeting on 8 September reiterating the body's intention to serve as a common platform in New York for discussion, information sharing and awareness raising. OMAR HILALE (Morocco) pointed to an unprecedented outbreak of the virus, intensified by weak public health centres that were pushed beyond capacity. The situation was worsening daily due to a lack of vaccines and specific treatments and to contagion. The number affected could rapidly double or triple with severe consequences for the region and the globe. The international community must use the Council meeting to push its response forward and tackle the outbreak's short and longer term consequences. Concerned by the negative impact of isolating countries, Morocco had maintained the air services of Royal Air Maroc, providing several fights per week to each of the most affected countries. Solidarity was needed not just to respond to conflict and human rights violations, but also to prevent a public health emergency. OLIVIER MARC ZEHNDER (Switzerland) stressed the threat posed by Ebola to global security and the need for swift action in response. He welcomed WHO's Ebola Response Roadmap and called for a long term response alongside efforts to contain the immediate crisis. He noted the almost 1 billion emergency appeal by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, WHO and the United Nations System Coordinator for Ebola to cover urgent needs in the three most affected countries in the coming six months. Switzerland had provided humanitarian aid and was supporting local non governmental organizations' efforts, with further increases to contributions currently being considered. The African Union decision to authorize a military and civilian humanitarian mission to help with the crisis was a positive step, as were efforts undertaken by the Peacebuilding Commission. Additionally, he welcomed the decision to roll over the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), temporarily suspending the previously envisaged drawdown, and he encouraged adjusting UNMIL's mandate to reflect the coordination and support the mission would provide to tackle Ebola. THOMAS MAYR HARTING, Head of the European Union Delegation, expressing deep concern over the Ebola crisis, said the best way to do justice to those who had lost their lives was to act and prevent future victims. The Union would continue its help in the most affected areas, in partnership with WHO, the Office of the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other international partners. He welcomed WHO's leadership in developing the Ebola Response Roadmap, and the United Nations system wide response. The Union had pledged 150 million euros for treatment, training and steps to contain the epidemic, medical laboratories, health services and budget support. That figure also included 5 million euros to the African Union to support affected nations. Several Union members had given bilateral support totalling 23 million euros and were contributing with in kind aid, including the secondment of health care specialists. The European Emergency Response Coordination Centre supported the Union's efforts. Furthermore, the Union was working actively to find ways to reduce the growing isolation of affected areas, he said. It would address the urgent need to retain and re establish transport links and medical evacuation. Additionally, it was preparing a comprehensive framework for its response, aligned with WHO's road map, which took into account the food and health system crises caused by the crisis and its damaging economic impact. On Monday, the Union held a high level meeting on Ebola in Brussels health ministers would meet next week in Milan. HALIT EVIK (Turkey) said that his Government had immediately mobilized financial resources and provided medical assistance to the affected countries, and plans were under consideration to scale up support to them through bilateral and multilateral channels. More importantly, Turkish Airlines was among the few airliners that continued its flights to the region. The Ebola outbreak required a comprehensive, coordinated and long term response. GUILLERMO RISHCHYNSKI (Canada) said that his Government had early on recognized the risks the Ebola outbreak represented and it had been a leader in making significant contributions to help contain its spread. It had provided expert deployments, vaccines, and financial support. Canada's contributions to WHO, M decins Sans Fronti res, and local Red Cross and Red Crescent organizations had helped establish the base for their respective response activities. Canada also had deployed a mobile laboratory to Sierra Leone and committed more than 2.5 million in personnel protective equipment to WHO for distribution, donating as many as 1,000 doses of experimental vaccine to that health agency. MOTOHIDE YOSHIKAWA (Japan) said that his Government had provided 5 million for West Africa and dispatched medical doctors specialized in infectious diseases to Liberia and Sierra Leone four times. Most recently, it decided to provide 20,000 infection protection suits for health care workers in those two countries. His country was also ready to provide a new medication, known as T 705, or Favipiravir, an experimental drug, developed by two Japanese companies, which was expected to be effective as a post exposure prophylaxis against Ebola. Strengthening Africa's social and economic resilience was a Japanese policy priority under the framework of the Tokyo International Conference on African Development. KAREL JAN GUSTAAF VAN OOSTEROM (Netherlands) said that his country's Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation would announce major contributions to combat the Ebola crisis. His delegation would also take part in the side event on Ebola next week to further discuss that grave threat to the international community. Even after the outbreak was controlled, the global community must continue to support the affected countries in West Africa, where regional and international trade and the economies were severely affected, food prices were rising, the agricultural harvest was limited due to little rainfall, and public health systems were in need of rebuilding. M RTEN GRUNDITZ (Sweden) said that, since April, his country had contributed 4.4 million to the three most affected States, mainly through such partners as the International Rescue Committee, M decins Sans Fronti res, Action Contre La Faim and the Swedish Red Cross. The Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency was in the final stages of preparing an additional package of at least 13 million in response to the appeal made by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and directed primarily to UNICEF, WHO and the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service. RON PROSOR (Israel), agreeing with the severity and global import of the Ebola epidemic, said his country was proud to be playing its part as per the Jewish ethos of "repairing the world" and following on the country's quick response to disasters, from Haiti to Ghana and the Philippines. It had already sent supplies, trainers and emergency funding to the West African region and Israeli non governmental organizations were preparing to send another medical team to Sierra Leone. "This must be the moment when we unite to defeat this disease and strengthen health systems around the world so this tragedy is never repeated," he said. GONZALO KONCKE (Uruguay) acknowledged the scale of the Ebola crisis, and expressed particular concern for the plight of women in the affected region. He welcomed the United Nations role in coordinating the worldwide response and expressed appreciation for the assistance pledged. His country would maintain its contribution to the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), despite the threat of Ebola spreading to that country, while developing strategies to ensure the health of its personnel. TETE ANTONIO, Permanent Observer of the African Union, said citizens in affected countries were living in great trepidation since the onset of the epidemic. Farmers and health workers could not go about their business without fear and the situation was exacerbated by the fact that it was taking place in post conflict countries in transition. Neighbouring countries remained on constant alert, with mistrust growing regionally and locally because of the disease's deadliness. That was affecting cross border trade and impacting food security, with prices rising. The need to stem the epidemic was clear and continuing agricultural production was essential. The crisis highlighted the weaknesses of public health systems and showed the importance of the African Health Strategy. Weak health systems were major impediments to fighting the disease and that was particularly true for countries emerging from conflict. "Desperate times called for desperate measures," he said, urging an end to procrastination. "The time to act is now." There were two priorities tackling the immediate emergency and preparing a long term approach. An Emergency Public Health Fund had been established by the African Union Commission, and the African Union had made a monetary pledge from its Humanitarian Assistance Fund and Department of Political Affairs. The long run approach included creation of an African Centre for Disease Control and Prevention. The focus was on operationalizing the Centre for Disease Control to speed up information sharing, tracking the disease and implementing a coordinated response. The Peace and Security Council had authorized the deployment of a humanitarian mission aimed at containing the outbreak it was expected to run for six months with monthly rotations of volunteers. Describing the work of the African Union, he stressed the importance of being guided by the reality on the ground. JUAN MANUEL GONZ LEZ DE LINARES PALOU (Spain) stressed the need to care for the sick, while looking after those giving the care. It was vital to ensure that affected States' medical facilities, as well as their social, economic and security structures, did not collapse. Additionally, it was counterproductive to isolate affected countries. The disease was not quarantined, and so that only hindered response efforts. Spain was actively tackling all the challenges, treating the ill by sending tons of medical and emergency supplies as well as experts in several fields. Spanish staff in affected countries was caring for the sick, but they, too, needed protection. The death of Fr. Miguel Pajares underlined the need for their protection. He noted also that pressure on health systems caused by Ebola was increasing the number dying from other basic diseases and the rate of maternal mortality. Spain continued providing food and nutritional support and was aware of the need to prevent the problem in neighbouring countries. SEBASTIANO CARDI (Italy) said that his Government had supported WHO since the outbreak of the crisis, making a preliminary contribution of 200,000 euros in April for Conakry. An additional 240,000 euros had recently been disbursed. Moreover, his Government had approved a bilateral action for the prevention and treatment of the virus through capacity building and technical assistance to the affected nations as well as public information about the transmission of the disease. Soon, up to 4 million euros in new humanitarian initiatives would be carried out by Italian Development Cooperation, depending on the situation on the ground. ALBERT SHINGIRO (Burundi) expressed great concern about Ebola's rapid spread, with the current degree of international mobilization not yet at the level needed to meet the current rate of spread. A more structured, coordinated approach was needed waiting until tomorrow would be too late. The scope of the outbreak demanded a more robust response and greater regional and international preparations. Local communities should participate, as grass roots groups took ownership of fights when they established their own responses and could really slow the spread if people were educated properly. Gains made through peacebuilding were being eroded daily and the affected countries' abilities to deal with the scourge were limited. He warned against isolating countries suffering outbreaks, suggesting it amounted to a denial of basic humanitarian assistance. Neighbouring countries should open humanitarian corridors to ensure supplies got through. Widespread panic hampered economies and slowed agricultural production, potentially leading to a food crisis in affected States. MARGUS KOLGA (Estonia), associating with the European Union, stressed that the epidemic was more than a public health crisis, and now the international response was taking form in the Security Council. Health workers were suffering, with 240 infected and 120 deaths. Health systems in ravaged areas were overburdened. The systems must be strengthened as the spread was outpacing the response. He appreciated work done and encouraged a continued focus on effective strategies and partnerships. All countries could play a role, and Estonia was doing its part, contributing to efforts and providing a doctor with expertise in the field. Work with the European Union was also ongoing to help reduce the growing isolation of affected areas. To avoid a humanitarian catastrophe, it was vital to act now. GEIR O. PEDERSEN (Norway) stressed the need to recognize that women were especially at risk for contracting the Ebola virus in their role as caregivers in homes and in hospitals. Up to two thirds of the victims were women. The Ebola outbreak called for immediate action. Norway had responded to that call by tripling its financial contribution with an additional 60 million Norwegian kroner. Its total contribution, which exceeded 13 million, would support efforts by the United Nations, the African Union and several non governmental organizations. NKOLOI NKOLOI (Botswana) stressed the need for African nations to pull together as "children of the same soil" to address the pandemic in partnership with the international community, providing whatever resources were at their disposal. His Government had decided last month to render financial assistance to Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. That modest humanitarian gesture of good will and compassion would go a long way in supporting the deployment of resources and expertise required to fight and eventually eradicate the dreadful virus. JIM MCLAY (New Zealand), in the context of what he agreed was an unprecedented crisis, recalled the warning about Ebola by Said Djinnit, head of the United Nations Office in West Africa, in a July briefing to the Council. It showed the importance of briefings from regional offices to flag emerging threats. He welcomed support already pledged for the response to the epidemic, including to regional organizations. His country was on the eve of a general election, but one of the first tasks of the new Government would be the urgent consideration of a range of options so that it could play its part in the international response. SITI HAJJAR ADNIN (Malaysia) said her Government earlier this week had answered the call for international support, particularly in response to the testimonies by medical authorities which identified the shortage of medical rubber gloves as a problem in combating the outbreak. The consignment of 20.9 million medical rubber gloves had been prepared for distribution in the affected countries. Of the 11 containers, three each would go to Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, with one each for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria. HARALD BRAUN (Germany) expressed his Government's commitment to the United Nations mission in Liberia as a police contributor. The Ebola threat would be a core issue of the Group of Seven (G 7) Foreign Ministers' meetings in New York next week and throughout Germany's presidency of that group. He welcomed the Secretary General's initiative to establish the special mission. The German air force would airlift medical and humanitarian goods and personnel to the region and provide materials for an Ebola treatment centre in Liberia with a capacity for 50 beds. To date, his country had pledged more than 17 million euros through WHO and aid agencies it also was providing funds to the Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine and the Robert Koch Institute for Disease Control and Prevention, which were operating diagnostic facilities in West Africa and had deployed 17 epidemiologists to the region. Today, Germany's Foreign Minister decided to allocate 5 million euros to counter the Ebola outbreak, and the country carried the largest share of the European Union's pledge of 150 million euros for that purpose. Additionally, Germany was funding the development of vaccines and new therapies against Ebola, and it was also examining the availability of appropriate medical evacuation capabilities. MIGUEL CAMILO RUIZ (Colombia) said all support must be given to the Ebola effected countries. They had made enormous efforts to stem the disease and they should not be marginalized. His country would provide funding as well as medicines. Clear lines of responsibility in support of the national priorities should be drawn, and support provided for long term structural improvement. As the crisis was not strictly a security matter, he stressed that the General Assembly should decide on the competence over the matter, he stressed. MAR A RUBIALES DE CHAMORRO (Nicaragua) said that the affected countries should be provided with all necessary support to successfully combat the severe epidemic. Her country planned to contribute personnel. She welcomed the role being played by the WHO and expressed appreciation for the assistance that had already been pledged. The global effort demonstrated that the community of nations could indeed unite to save lives, she commented. S KOU KASS (Mali) said the United States' reputation for being a pioneer was reflected in its organization of this important meeting. The delegation had organized a similar meeting in January 2000 on HIV AIDS. Ebola was not new to the African region, but the epidemic affecting the west of the continent was unprecedented in terms of its spread and the number affected. Mali was working bilaterally, sub regionally and regionally to implement measures recommended by various bodies. He was pleased to join the response and commended the United States' initiative and strong international mobilization coalescing around it. It was urgent to coordinate efforts to tackle the disease because it would wait for no one in moving from person to person, country to country and around the world. He supported the Secretary General's proposed mission. IBRAHIMA SORY SYLLA (Senegal) stressed his appreciation to the Council for trying to help countries affected by the Ebola epidemic. Ebola was not just an African issue, but a global one which affected all. He was grateful to international partners, including States and civil society organizations, which had helped the affected countries, and he underlined his full support to brother countries, noting efforts made to establish humanitarian corridors. Senegal, since it had raised its head, had implemented a strategy to prevent the disease's spread. There was no record of any patient dying from Ebola on Senegal's national territory, he said, adding that one person had contracted it but had been treated and survived. Unified action must be strengthened given the solid links between the countries in the subregion. GEORGE WILFRED TALBOT (Guyana) welcomed adoption of the resolution and looked forward to General Assembly action on the subject. The outbreak was the biggest of its kind in history, requiring regional and international responses that were multidimensional in nature. Governments of affected countries were making valiant efforts to contain the crisis and respond to the effects of the epidemic. It was imperative that the international community join in the response, he said, expressing support for the new United Nations mission. ABDALLA OTHMAN KHAMIS (United Republic of Tanzania) paid tribute to all those who had stepped up so far to respond to the Ebola threat and welcomed the adoption of today's resolution, as well as the commitments made in the chamber. It was now necessary to act on them. He opposed marginalization of the affected countries and affirmed the importance of increasing the health capacities of the countries involved to prevent further outbreaks. His country planned to contribute to the response to Ebola, particularly through regional organizations. ANATOLIO NDONG MBA (Equatorial Guinea) welcomed the international solidarity on Ebola that had been shown in the Security Council chamber today. It was now time to "walk the talk". All relevant United Nations agencies must be engaged in the response because of the efforts required in many sectors. His country planned to open up transport to the countries of the region and to make millions of dollars available to the international response. The pandemic could spread throughout the world, and therefore as much support as possible should be provided. Taking the floor to make additional comments, Ms. CHAN thanked the Security Council membership for the very valuable and various types of support given to the three affected countries. The unanimous support for the resolution and the level of co sponsorship was unprecedented and she said her heart was warmed by support for the Secretary General's initiative to establish a mission to tackle the outbreak. She promised to act quickly and efficiently and to work to kick the Ebola outbreak out of the African continent. Also speaking for a second time, Dr. NABARRO gave feedback on the remarks made, saying that speakers appreciated the seriousness of the challenges of this major public health crisis that could have many other extensive impacts. He also welcomed the solidarity shown to affected countries and saw increased signs of willingness to open or maintain air and other trading links, as well as strong indications of solidarity among African nations and around the world. He was also pleased to see recognition of the other parts of the United Nations, particularly the WHO, along with other agencies. Several Governments, some of which were in Africa, had offered generous commitments, as had the more traditional donors. It was indeed "a global coalition" and Governments were keen to coordinate and to trust the United Nations in acting as the coordinating body. Virtually all speakers noted support for the exceptional public health mission proposed by the Secretary General.
The Council president, US Ambassador Samantha Power, said this was the Council's first emergency meeting on a public health issue. In an unprecedented action, an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council has declared the Ebola virus disease "a threat to international peace and security" while Secretary General Ban Ki moon announced the formation of an emergency mission to fight the deadly disease. The Council, which usually deals with international conflicts, took on the disease ravaging three countries in West Africa, and approved a resolution Thursday sponsored by 131 countries "determining that the unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak in Africa constitute a threat to international peace and security". Underlining the international concern over the disease with no vaccine available and cures rare, it was the largest number of sponsors ever for a resolution in the Security Council. The Council president, US Ambassador Samantha Power, said this was the Council's first emergency meeting on a public health issue. Ban announced at the Council meeting the formation of the new organisation to take on the disease on a battle footing. "To be known as the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, or UNMEER," he said, it "will have five priorities stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks." He appealed for international aid for the effort, not only from governments, but also businesses. The UN has estimated that it would need 1 billion over the next six months to deal with the crisis. Ban also called for ending travel and trade restrictions on three affected countries Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leon as these could affect medical personnel going there and delivery of supplies. The Council resolution took up the issue, expressing concern about major airlines and shipping companies introducing travel restrictions to the affected countries. World Health Organisation head Margaret Chan told the Council that reports Ebola has affected more than 5,500 people and killed over 2,500 killed are "vast underestimates". "None of us experienced in containing outbreaks has ever seen, in our lifetimes, an emergency on this scale, with this degree of suffering and with this magnitude of cascading consequences," she said. Earlier, at a press briefing, a reporter asked the secretary general's spokesman about a potential threat of terrorists using Ebola. The spokesman said it was a matter of concern. "It can also impact the political stability of a country and lack of political stability can breed other problems. So, this is why, I think, the secretary general is focused on getting the UN system to work together in the most efficient way possible to stop the virus from spreading and to support national governments.
(Updates with vote by Security Council, adds comments by U.N. chief Ban Ki moon, WHO Director General Margaret Chan, MSF worker from Liberia) By Michelle Nichols UNITED NATIONS, Sept 18 (Reuters) The United Nations will create a special mission to combat Ebola, deploying staff in the worst affected states Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone as the U.N. Security Council declared the outbreak a "threat to international peace and security." U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki moon said he will appoint a special envoy to head the U.N. Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER), which will push a "rapid and massive mobilization" of people, material and financial resources. "This international mission ... will have five priorities stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks," Ban told the Security Council on Thursday. The 15 member council unanimously adopted a U.S. drafted resolution on Thursday calling on states "to lift general travel and border restrictions, imposed as a result of the Ebola outbreak, and that contribute to the further isolation of the affected countries and undermine their efforts to respond." The resolution was co sponsored by some 131 states, which the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Samantha Power, said was the most support given to a Security Council resolution. It is only the third time the council has taken such action on a public health crisis after adopting two resolutions on HIV AIDS. The United Nations action comes as the United States unveiled plans to send 3,000 troops and build 17 treatment centers, France announced plans to install a military hospital, and Cuba, China, Britain and others have pledged medical workers, health centers and other forms of support. At least 2,630 people have died in the worst outbreak of Ebola virus since the disease was identified in 1976 it has so far infected at least 5,357 people in West Africa, the World Health Organization said on Thursday. Jackson Naimah, a Medecins Sans Frontieres team leader in an Ebola treatment center in the Liberian capital, Monrovia, appealed to the Security Council for help. "The future of my country is hanging in the balance," he said via video link. "We are trying to treat as many people as we can, but there are not nearly enough treatment centers and patient beds," he said. "People are sitting at the gates of our centers, literally begging for their lives. They rightly feel alone, neglected, denied left to die a horrible, undignified death." Ebola is spread by contact with the body fluids of infected people. The outbreak began in Guinea in March and has spread to Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal. An unrelated outbreak has happened in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO Director General Margaret Chan said an "exponentially rising caseload threatens to push governments to the brink of state failure." "WHO has successfully managed many big outbreaks in recent years. But this Ebola event is different. This is likely the greatest peacetime challenge that the United Nations and its agencies have ever faced," Chan told the Security Council. "Everything now is unprecedented. Everything now is happening faster than ever before," she said. Ban told the council he hoped an advance team for the new U.N. mission would be on the ground before the end of the month. He is due to brief the 193 member U.N. General Assembly on his plans for the mission on Friday. (Reporting by Michelle Nichols Editing by Steve Orlofsky)
Bishkek (AKIpress) Kyrgyzstan has become co sponsor of the UN Security Council resolution on Ebola passed on September 18, the Foreign Ministry of Kyrgyzstan said. The United Nations Security Council declared the Ebola crisis in West Africa to be a threat to international peace and security. The resolution calls on countries worldwide to urgently send medical personnel and supplies to contain the outbreak. United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki moon announced a plan to set up an emergency mission to tackle the swiftly spreading disease that has already ravaged the nations of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea and spread panic and fear. "The gravity and scale of the situation now require a level of international action unprecedented for a health emergency," Mr. Ban said. The resolution was co sponsored by 131 countries, the most co sponsors of any Council resolution ever. The number of Ebola virus disease cases has hit 5,335. Around 2,622 already died of the disease. The virus is mostly spread in West Africa Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone.
UNITED NATIONS The UN Security Council on Thursday adopted a resolution declaring the Ebola outbreak a threat to world peace and security, and calling on countries to provide urgent aid. The resolution was adopted unanimously after UN Secretary General Ban Ki moon warned that the number of Ebola infections was doubling every three weeks, in particular in Liberia. The council heard a desperate appeal from Liberian medical aid worker Jackson Naimah for assistance to beat back the epidemic that has left about 2,600 dead and over 5,000 others severely ill in West Africa. "Please send your helicopters, your centers, your beds and your expert personnel," said Naimah, speaking on video link from Monrovia. "We do not have the capacity to respond to this crisis. If the international community does not stand up, we will be wiped out." In its resolution, the council declared that the "unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak in Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and security" and warned that "peacebuilding gains... could be reversed" in West Africa. It called on countries to "provide urgent assistance, including deployable medical capabilities such as field hospitals" with staff and supplies, laboratories, clinics and to provide "support capabilities for airlift." The measure also urged nations to lift travel and border restrictions, and asked airlines and shipping companies to maintain their links with affected countries. It was only the third resolution adopted by the top world body on a public health emergency in the history of the United Nations. The council voted on measures to address the AIDS pandemic in 2000 and 2011. The United Nations has set a goal of stopping the spread of Ebola within six to nine months and is appealing for nearly 1 billion to buy supplies for West Africa. Ban announced plans to set up a new UN mission to combat Ebola, with its headquarters in West Africa. "Our best estimate is that we need a 20 fold increase in assistance," said Ban. An "Ebola summit" is due to be held next week on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly to further mobilize aid and resources to fight the disease. (AFP)
55 CONNECT 51 TWEETLINKEDIN 4 COMMENTEMAILMORE Six months into the West African Ebola epidemic, the United Nations Security Council voted unanimously Thursday to create a special medical mission to respond to the disaster. The force should be on the ground in West Africa by the end of the month. "Ebola matters to us all," said Ban Ki Moon, U.N. secretary general, who oversaw the U.N. Security Council's first meeting on the Ebola outbreak, the largest epidemic in the disease's history. "We cannot afford delays. The penalty for inaction is high. We need to race ahead of the outbreak and then turn and face it with all of our energy and strength." The United Nation Mission for Ebola Emergency Response should be on the ground in West Africa by the end of the month. The world has been racing against an outbreak growing at an exponential rate, but always falling behind. To get ahead of the epidemic, the world will have to scale up its response by about 20 fold, Ban said. That will require about 1 billion. There are five key priorities stopping infection treating the sick ensuring essential services preserving stability and preventing future outbreaks, Ban said. The outbreak has grown to 5,335 cases in five countries of West Africa Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Nigeria and Senegal with 2,622 deaths, according to the World Health Organization. These numbers are underestimated, the World Health Organization says, because many cases have gone unreported. But half of these cases were diagnosed in just the past three weeks, leading researchers at Seattle's Fred Hutchinson Cancer Treatment Center to predict there could be as many as 10,000 cases by September 24. The new U.N. resolution marks a sea change in the way the world is responding to the outbreak. For six months, as the outbreak intensified, countries closed borders, canceled flights and pulled back ships from ports, leading to escalating food prices, hunger, unemployment and instability. President Obama responded to the West African outbreak this week by announcing that he will send 3,000 military personnel to help coordinate disaster response, with supplies for building 1,700 more hospital beds. "Today, instead of isolating the affected countries, we call for flooding them, flooding them with resources," said Samantha Power, the United States' ambassador to the U.N. Thursday was the only the third time in the history that the U.N Security Council met to confront a public health issue. The only other times meetings focused on AIDS. "There will soon be more cases in Liberia alone than in the previous four decades of this disease," Ban said, noting that leaders of the affected countries Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea have asked the United Nations to step in. "The spread of the disease is outpacing the response. No single government can manage the crisis response on its own. ... This unprecedented situation requires unprecedented steps." Jackson Naimah, who works with Doctors Without Borders in Monrovia, Liberia, made an impassioned call for help. "We do not have the capacity to respond to this crisis on its own," said Naimah, noting that, even as he spoke, patients were being turned away from his hospital. "If the international community does not stand up, we will be wiped out." Ban called on airlines to resume flights to affected countries, which many have canceled due to the risk of infection. He also asked shipping companies to resume working with local ports. "This is likely the greatest peace time challenge that the United Nations has ever faced," said Margaret Chan, director general of the World Health Organization. 55 CONNECT 51 TWEETLINKEDIN 4 COMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story http usat.ly 1uf3QCI
Shannon Stapleton ReutersU.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Samantha Power raises her hand in a vote during the Security Council meeting on the Ebola crisis at the U.N. headquarters in New York. Moscow endorses a draft resolution on combating foreign "terrorist fighters" proposed by Washington at the UN Security Council, Interfax news agency quoted a Russian Foreign Ministry official on Friday as saying. "On the whole, it is acceptable for us in its current form," Ilya Rogachev, director of one of the ministry's departments, told Interfax. The United States circulated a draft resolution that would demand countries "prevent and suppress" the recruitment and travel of foreign fighters to join extremist militant groups like Islamic State. Washington hopes the 15 member Security Council will approve it unanimously on Sept. 24.
Emergency measure to tackle Ebola outbreak means families must stay at home for the next three days Almost all of Sierra Leone's six million citizens have been ordered to stay inside for three days. The curfew, which began at midnight last night, is to allow health workers to assess and tackle the Ebola epidemic which is raging in West Africa. As 30,000 volunteers begin to make house calls this morning educating residents about the disease, distributing soap and checking for infected patients and bodies the UN said the outbreak was a threat to world peace, The Guardian reports. The country's president, Ernest Bai Koroma, said that "extraordinary times" required extraordinary measures and claimed the action would be "a very big boost to our collective effort to stop the outbreak". However, Medecins sans Frontieres said the lockdown, from which security services are exempt, was too draconian and could be counterproductive. The medical NGO said the measures might criminalise people and "jeopardise the trust between people and health providers". The Daily Telegraph reports that the UN Security Council in New York yesterday declared the rise of Ebola in West Africa a "threat to international peace and security". Ban Ki moon, the UN secretary general, announced a special mission to fight the disease. "The gravity and scale of the situation now require a level of international action unprecedented for a health emergency," said Ban, who announced he would be appointing an envoy to head the newly created UN Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. He added "This international mission ... will have five priorities stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks."
A health worker brings a woman suspected of having contracted the Ebola virus to an ambulance in Monrovia, Liberia, September 15, 2014. REUTERS James Giahyue The United Nations will create a special mission to combat Ebola, deploying staff in the worst affected states Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone as the U.N. Security Council declared the outbreak a "threat to international peace and security." U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki moon said he will appoint a special envoy to head the U.N. Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER), which will push a "rapid and massive mobilization" of people, material and financial resources. ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT "This international mission ... will have five priorities stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks," Ban told the Security Council on Thursday. The 15 member council unanimously adopted a U.S. drafted resolution on Thursday calling on states "to lift general travel and border restrictions, imposed as a result of the Ebola outbreak, and that contribute to the further isolation of the affected countries and undermine their efforts to respond." The resolution was co sponsored by some 131 states, which the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Samantha Power, said was the most support given to a Security Council resolution. It is only the third time the council has taken such action on a public health crisis after adopting two resolutions on HIV AIDS. The United Nations action comes as the United States unveiled plans to send 3,000 troops and build 17 treatment centers, France announced plans to install a military hospital, and Cuba, China, Britain and others have pledged medical workers, health centers and other forms of support. At least 2,630 people have died in the worst outbreak of Ebola virus since the disease was identified in 1976 it has so far infected at least 5,357 people in West Africa, the World Health Organization said on Thursday. Jackson Naimah, a Medecins Sans Frontieres team leader in an Ebola treatment center in the Liberian capital, Monrovia, appealed to the Security Council for help. "The future of my country is hanging in the balance," he said via video link. "We are trying to treat as many people as we can, but there are not nearly enough treatment centers and patient beds," he said. "People are sitting at the gates of our centers, literally begging for their lives. They rightly feel alone, neglected, denied left to die a horrible, undignified death." Ebola is spread by contact with the body fluids of infected people. The outbreak began in Guinea in March and has spread to Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal. An unrelated outbreak has happened in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO Director General Margaret Chan said an "exponentially rising caseload threatens to push governments to the brink of state failure." "WHO has successfully managed many big outbreaks in recent years. But this Ebola event is different. This is likely the greatest peacetime challenge that the United Nations and its agencies have ever faced," Chan told the Security Council. "Everything now is unprecedented. Everything now is happening faster than ever before," she said. Ban told the council he hoped an advance team for the new U.N. mission would be on the ground before the end of the month. He is due to brief the 193 member U.N. General Assembly on his plans for the mission on Friday.
UNITED NATIONS (Reuters) The United Nations will create a special mission to combat Ebola, deploying staff in the worst affected states Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone as the U.N. Security Council declared the outbreak a "threat to international peace and security." U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki moon said he will appoint a special envoy to head the U.N. Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER), which will push a "rapid and massive mobilization" of people, material and financial resources. "This international mission ... will have five priorities stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks," Ban told the Security Council on Thursday. The 15 member council unanimously adopted a U.S. drafted resolution on Thursday calling on states "to lift general travel and border restrictions, imposed as a result of the Ebola outbreak, and that contribute to the further isolation of the affected countries and undermine their efforts to respond." The resolution was co sponsored by some 131 states, which the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Samantha Power, said was the most support given to a Security Council resolution. It is only the third time the council has taken such action on a public health crisis after adopting two resolutions on HIV AIDS. The United Nations action comes as the United States unveiled plans to send 3,000 troops and build 17 treatment centers, France announced plans to install a military hospital, and Cuba, China, Britain and others have pledged medical workers, health centers and other forms of support. At least 2,630 people have died in the worst outbreak of Ebola virus since the disease was identified in 1976 it has so far infected at least 5,357 people in West Africa, the World Health Organization said on Thursday. Jackson Naimah, a Medecins Sans Frontieres team leader in an Ebola treatment center in the Liberian capital, Monrovia, appealed to the Security Council for help. "The future of my country is hanging in the balance," he said via video link. "We are trying to treat as many people as we can, but there are not nearly enough treatment centers and patient beds," he said. "People are sitting at the gates of our centers, literally begging for their lives. They rightly feel alone, neglected, denied left to die a horrible, undignified death." Ebola is spread by contact with the body fluids of infected people. The outbreak began in Guinea in March and has spread to Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal. An unrelated outbreak has happened in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. WHO Director General Margaret Chan said an "exponentially rising caseload threatens to push governments to the brink of state failure." "WHO has successfully managed many big outbreaks in recent years. But this Ebola event is different. This is likely the greatest peacetime challenge that the United Nations and its agencies have ever faced," Chan told the Security Council. "Everything now is unprecedented. Everything now is happening faster than ever before," she said. Ban told the council he hoped an advance team for the new U.N. mission would be on the ground before the end of the month. He is due to brief the 193 member U.N. General Assembly on his plans for the mission on Friday. (Reporting by Michelle Nichols Editing by Steve Orlofsky)
The UN Security Council has declared the outbreak of the Ebola virus in West Africa a "threat to international peace and security". The council unanimously adopted a resolution calling on states to provide more resources to combat the outbreak. US ambassador to the UN Samantha Power told the BBC's Nick Bryant that she hoped the statement by the UN Security Council would be a wake up call. ''It is going to spread to other countries in the region...and beyond, if we do not dramatically scale up our efforts,'' she said.
The U.N. Security Council voted unanimously Thursday on an urgent resolution calling for nations to provide immediate assistance in the fight against Ebola, which WHO Director Margaret Chan called "likely the greatest peacetime challenge" the United Nations has ever faced. The resolution called on member nations to lift travel and border restrictions in the Ebola affected region of West Africa, and to step up their response to the disease, which it said was a "threat to international peace and security." The resolution was sponsored by 130 countries, the highest level of support for any security council resolution in the history of the U.N., according to U.S. Ambassador Samantha Power, who is also the council's president. In remarks before the vote, U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki moon also announced the creation of an emergency health mission to coordinate the international response to the Ebola crisis, and said the agency estimates it needs a 20 fold increase in assistance to turn the tide of the outbreak. Ban said the U.N. has facilitated the use of airports in Spain and Ghana as travel hubs for the flow of medical personnel and supplies into West Africa, and called on major airlines and shipping companies to also resume services to Ebola stricken nations. "The suffering and spillover effect in the region and beyond demand the attention of the entire world," Ban said. The Security Council has met only twice before to discuss the security implications of a public health issue, Ban said, both times to address the AIDS epidemic. "The gravity and scale of the situation now require a level of international action unprecedented for a health emergency," he told the assembly. "We cannot afford delays. The penalty for inaction is high." Ban said the new mission, the U.N. Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER), would focus on five priorities stopping the outbreak, treating the sick, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks. The secretary general said the new mission would align the World Health Organization's strategic expertise with the logistical capacities across U.N. agencies. Senior U.N. System Coordinator for Ebola Dr. David Nabarro, said the outbreak is doubling in size every three weeks, and urged a "massively scaled up" response. Speaking from Monrovia, Liberia, Dr. Jackson Naimah of Medicins San Frontieres, an organization that has been an outspoken critic of the U.N. and other organizations it feels have been too slow to mobilize against Ebola, painted a grim picture on the ground. Patients are dying at the front gates of the hospital where he works, Naimah said, begging to be let in to the overflowing treatment center. One boy, whose father had died of Ebola, approached the gate, his mouth bloodied, but there was no space to take him in, Naimah said. "I thought to myself, that this boy is going to take a taxi, and he is going to go home to his family ... infect his family, and also other people," Naimah told the assembly via a live video feed, and added that the future of his country "is hanging in the balance." "Please send your helicopters, your centers, your beds and your expert personnel. But know that we also need the basics" like soap, water and buckets, Naimah said. "We do not have the capacity to respond to this crisis on its own. If the international community does not stand up, we will be wiped out." Chan said international aid commitments made this week would vastly transform the U.N.'s ability to control the outbreak, and called them a "clarion call for other countries to follow." "None of us experienced in containing outbreaks has ever seen in our lifetimes an emergency on this scale, with this degree of suffering, and with this magnitude of cascading consequences," Chan said. Power called on other nations to commit resources to the crisis. The U.S. ambassador gave an account from another MSF staffer, who said he spoke to a father who had brought his sick daughter in the trunk of his car, hoping to save the rest of his family from the virus. There was no room, and he was turned away, Power said. "We don't want to live in a world where a father bearing his sick daughter is turned away. It's against everything we believe in and stand for. It's wrong, and it's dangerous," Power said. "One of the main reasons this outbreak has spread dramatically is because up to now, we haven't come together sufficiently to confront it," Power said. "Knowing what we know now ... we will have no excuse if we still fail to come together and do what is needed. Nobody will be able to say we didn't realize it could get so bad."
VOA Special Report IS Militants Draw Millions From Vast Sources Against the grim backdrop of global terrorism and a deadly health crisis, world leaders will convene in New York this week for their annual gathering at the United Nations General Assembly. The terrorist group calling itself the Islamic State and efforts to control the spread of the Ebola virus are expected to dominate discussions. The violence in Iraq and Syria which has become a breeding ground for extremist groups most notably the Islamic State will be addressed by the international community, said U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki moon. "I welcome the growing international consensus to act against this serious threat to global and regional peace and security," he said. A centerpiece of that effort will be a U.N. Security Council meeting chaired by President Barack Obama on the rise of foreign terrorist fighters. New York University Professor Richard Gowan said the meeting sends an important political message. "President Obama has put together a coalition of 40 countries to fight ISIS. At the U.N., he will be reaffirming that struggle, " he noted. "Actually, most of the hard work has been done already, but the U.N. is a good stage to talk about the need to fight the Islamists." Ebola Also high on the international agenda will be containing the recent outbreak of the Ebola virus, which has killed nearly half of the about 5,000 people infected with it in West Africa. "This is not just a health crisis it has grave humanitarian, economic and social consequences that could spread far beyond the affected countries," Ban said. U.S. Ambassador Samantha Power said the annual meetings are meant to bring leaders together to address global challenges. "Both of these threats illustrate the founding purpose of the United Nations and the purpose of bringing the heads of state of the United Nations together every season which is how do we pool our resources to cooperate, not only to deal with common threats, but to deal with threats that we simply, no single nation, can deal with alone," she said. Africa, Ukraine, Gaza Crises in Africa, the conflict in Ukraine and the aftermath of the 50 day long war in the Gaza Strip are other issues that will be discussed by the leaders. The secretary general is also convening a summit on climate change to urge countries to make commitments to cut greenhouse gas emissions. NYU's Richard Gowan said the past year has been an especially difficult one for the international community. "This has been a really painful year in U.N. diplomacy, with fights over Syria, fights over Ukraine. The challenge from ISIS and the challenge from Ebola are two things all governments can agree on. And there will be a big push to try to restore some unity at the U.N. after a very, very divisive year," he said. Some of that diplomacy will be conducted in the newly renovated General Assembly Hall, the final part of a nearly six year long, 2.2 billion U.N. campus renovation that has made the nearly 70 year old complex safer and more energy efficient.
From Scotland's big decision to Hillary Clinton's return, an exploding world population to a spider app a roundup of the week's news Scotland votes to stay! The votes have been counted and the people have decided Scotland is to stay in the UK. In a historic independence referendum, 55.3 voted no to independence while 44.7 voted yes. UK prime minister David Cameron declared it a "clear result" and promised a devolution revolution across Britain, including votes on English issues by English MPs at Westminster, as he hailed Scotland's decision to remain in the UK. He said There can be no disputes, no reruns we have heard the settled will of the Scottish people." Scotland's first minister, Alex Salmond, struck a defiant note and said that it had been a "triumph for democratic politics". He said he accepted Scotland had not "at this stage" decided to vote for independence. Final results in full Scottish referendum result the yes and no camps react Follow events live Isis shifts to a chilling new propaganda tactic British press photojournalist John Cantlie, who has been held prisoner by Islamic State (Isis) militants for almost two years, became the latest hostage to be forced to appear in an online video. But it appears that the militant group have a chilling new propaganda strategy. Cantlie, dressed in an orange jumpsuit, has delivered a propaganda message online on behalf of the group. He says, while appearing to be under duress Now I know what you're thinking, you're thinking 'He's only doing this because he's a prisoner. He's got a gun at his head, and he's being forced to do this,' right? Well, it's true, I am a prisoner, that I cannot deny, but seeing as I've been abandoned by my government and my fate now lies in the hands of the Islamic State, I have nothing to lose." He added I'm going to show you the truth behind these systems and motivation of the Islamic State, and how the western media, the very organisation I used to work for, can twist and manipulate that truth to the public back home." This marks a shift from the previous three hostage beheading videos by Isis, which show the murders of US journalists James Foley, Steven Sotloff and Scottish aid worker David Haines, and threatened the killing of aid convoy volunteer Alan Henning. Read article Microsoft buys Minecraft for 2.5bn The retro Lego style building video game that has over 100 million users worldwide has been sold to computer giant Microsoft for a staggering 2.5bn. Minecraft's developers Mojang said on their website "Yes we're being bought by Microsoft" and added "Everything is going to be OK. 3" The studio's founder, Markus "Notch" Perrson, has previously rejected attempts to buy the company. Read the article Minecraft a crash guide Matisse The Cut Outs becomes Tate's most popular exhibition The exhibition of the late French artist, who created fluid pieces and drew with scissors, received 562,622 visitors. The cut outs, produced between 1937 and Matisse's death in 1954, represented the final chapter in a long artistic career. Works include his popular The Snail, Blue Nude and and Icarus. The Tate Modern has retained its position as the most visited gallery of modern and contemporary work in the world, and announced that overall visitor numbers were 7.04 million across its four galleries Britain, Modern, Liverpool and St Ives in 2013 14. Read the article Henri Matisse The Cut Outs at Tate Modern in pictures "Hello Iowa!" Hillary is back "I'm back!" Hillary Clinton said in Iowa this week, to a cheering crowd. There were signs of Clinton's impending 2016 presidential run everywhere as she addressed a rally for Iowa senator Tom Harkin. Hillary T shirts were distributed from a Ready for Hillary bus. College students were flown in in from the west coast to affix Hillary stickers to cars. Introducing the former first lady, New York senator and secretary of state, Harkin said "There are many more chapters to be written in the amazing life of Hillary Clinton." He called the Clintons "the comeback couple". It was Hillary's first foray into politics since she stood down as secretary of state and her first visit to Iowa since the state's Democrats delivered a devastating political blow to her presidential campaign nearly seven years ago. Clinton has said she will make a final decision about a second run for the Democratic nomination after her defeat by Barack Obama in 2008 in the new year. Read the article World population to hit 11 billion in 2100 The world population is currently seven billion, but there is a 70 chance that the number of people on the planet will rise continuously to 11 billion in 2100, according to ground breaking analysis. It overturns 20 years of consensus that the global population will peak by 2050 to about nine billion people. "The previous projections said this problem was going to go away so it took the focus off the population issue," said Prof Adrian Raftery at the University of Washington, who led the international research team. "There is now a strong argument that population should return to the top of the international agenda. Population is the driver of just about everything else, and rapid population growth can exacerbate all kinds of challenges." Lack of healthcare, poverty, pollution and rising unrest and crime are all problems linked to booming populations, he said. Sub saharan Africa is set to be by far the fastest growing region, with population rocketing from 1bn today to between 3.5 billion and five billion in 2100. Read the article Iran detains UK citizen over ban on women watching sports alongside men Ghoncheh Ghavami, 25, who holds dual British and Iranian citizenship, was arrested with other female fans who were peacefully demanding to be allowed into a volleyball match in Iran. Nearly three months on, she remains in jail. She had stood outside Tehran's Azadi (freedom) stadium, holding up a placard. There has been a ban on women attending football matches since 1979 and in 2012, this was extended to volleyball. Amnesty International says Ghavami is being held in Tehran's notorious Evin prison, where she was kept in solitary confinement for more than 40 days before being moved to a shared cell. The human rights organisation said She is a prisoner of conscience, arrested solely for taking part in a peaceful protest against the ban on women attending volleyball world league matches in Tehran's Azadi stadium." Read the article Want to identify spiders? There's an app for that It's now autumn, which means you're likely to see an increase of spiders in your home, as it's mating season. But if you're keen to identify the eight legged creepy crawlies, there's now an app to do it. Spider in Da House lists descriptions and photographs of 12 of the most common spiders found in homes from the approximately 660 species in the UK. Prof Adam Hart, an entomologist and ecologist at the University of Gloucestershire and one of the creators of the app said I'm not a massive fan of spiders. Biologically they're very interesting, but if I'm watching TV and one stalks across the room, I'll jump like anyone else." Read article UN says Ebola outbreak is a threat to world peace The UN security council has called the Ebola outbreak "a threat to international peace and security" and has called for a 1bn aid effort to tackle the virus. The resolution was adopted unanimously by the UN's most powerful body at an emergency meeting where 130 countries discussed global concern at the outbreak. The UN health chief, Dr Margaret Chan, said the "deadly and dreaded Ebola virus had got ahead of us" and warned that it was time to act urgently. She added This is likely to be the greatest peacetime challenge that the United Nations and its agencies have ever faced." The UN secretary general, Ban Ki moon, said the number of Ebola cases was doubling every three weeks. He said the largest outbreak of Ebola in history "demands the attention of the world" and "unprecedented" action. Earlier in the week, US president Barack Obama announced an Ebola task force of 3,000 US military personnel. Read the article Obama to announce Ebola force of 3,000 US military personnel Goodbye Phones 4U High street mobile phone retailer Phones 4U has gone into administration and closed its stores on Monday. Hopes for a rescue package of swapping debt for shares in the business were dashed. PwC, the consultants, said in a conference call with the bondholders on Thursday that there was no scope for such a deal. Potential buyers of parts of the company, which has 550 standalone stores and 5,596 employees, had included Vodafone and EE. The two operators have been accused by Phones 4U's owners of driving it out of business by ending their distribution deals, where the retailer sells contracts and handsets on behalf of those networks. Phones 4U had 89m of stock, of which 67m was new handsets. About 60 of the handsets were made by Apple and Samsung, and none of these were new products such as the iPhone 6. PwC expects to sell Phones 4U's profitable insurance business next week. Read the article
News outlets report on the U.N. Security Council's adoption of an historic resolution on Ebola. Agence France Presse Security Council Ebola threatens world peace "The U.N. Security Council on Thursday declared the Ebola outbreak a threat to world peace and called on countries to provide urgent aid to West Africa, the epicenter of the growing crisis..." (Landry, 9 18). Associated Press U.N. calls Ebola a threat to international peace "...A resolution adopted unanimously by the U.N.'s most powerful body at an emergency meeting with an unprecedented 130 countries as co sponsors reflected the rising global concern at the swiftly spreading Ebola outbreak in West Africa. It marked only the second time that the Security Council has addressed a public health emergency, the first being the HIV AIDS pandemic..." (Lederer, 9 18). New York Times Security Council Unanimously Passes Ebola Resolution "The United Nations Security Council, in a highly unusual move, on Thursday declared the Ebola crisis in West Africa to be a threat to international peace and security, unanimously passing a resolution that calls on countries worldwide to urgently send medical personnel and supplies to contain the outbreak..." (Sengupta, 9 18). ScienceInsider U.N. Security Council passes historic resolution to confront Ebola "...Several speakers stressed that the epidemic is especially tragic because the three countries have made significant progress in their development in the past few years. U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Samantha Power, who chaired Thursday's meeting, noted that the resolution had 130 co sponsors, more than any previous one in the history of the Security Council. Here are excerpts of speeches made by Power and others..." (Cohen, 9 18).
The 15 member council unanimously adopted a resolution after UN Secretary General Ban Ki moon warned that the number of Ebola infections already more than 5,000 was doubling every three weeks, notably in Liberia. It was only the third resolution on a public health emergency to be approved in the history of the United Nations. The council voted on measures to address the AIDS pandemic in 2000 and 2011. The council heard a desperate appeal from Liberian medical aid worker Jackson Naimah for assistance to beat back the epidemic that has left at least 2,600 dead in West Africa. "Please send your helicopters, your centers, your beds and your expert personnel," said Naimah, speaking on video link from Monrovia. "We do not have the capacity to respond to this crisis. If the international community does not stand up, we will be wiped out." In its resolution, the council declared that the "unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak in Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and security" and warned that "peacebuilding gains... could be reversed" in West Africa. It called on countries to "provide urgent assistance, including deployable medical capabilities such as field hospitals" with staff and supplies, laboratories, clinics and to provide "support capabilities for airlift." The measure also urged nations to lift travel and border restrictions, and asked airlines and shipping companies to maintain their links with affected countries. World Health Organization director Margaret Chan said the Ebola outbreak is "likely the greatest peacetime challenge that the United Nations and its agencies have ever faced." Ebola mission The United Nations has said nearly 1 billion would be needed to defeat the worst ever outbreak of Ebola, which is on track to infect 20,000 people by the end of the year. Ban announced plans to set up a new UN mission to combat Ebola, with its headquarters in West Africa. "Our best estimate is that we need a 20 fold increase in assistance," he added. An "Ebola summit" is due to be held next week on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly to further mobilize aid and resources to fight the disease. The World Bank this week warned of a "potentially catastrophic blow" to the economies of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone with growth rates slashed and government revenues hit hard. Speaking on behalf of the medical aid organisation Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), Naimah described a crippling shortage of beds, forcing health care workers to turn away patients. "Right now, as I speak, people are sitting at the gates of our centers, literally begging for their lives," he said. The UN has set a goal of stopping the spread of Ebola within six to nine months but MSF has called the response so far "lethally inadequate." A special representative will be appointed soon by Ban to lead the Ebola crisis mission, which is to be the focal point for the international response to the epidemic. The United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER) will have its headquarters in the region, but not in the three most affected nations, where country offices will be opened.
At an emergency meeting due on Thursday, the UN Security Council will try to find ways to scale up the global response to the Ebola epidemic. "It is crucial that council members discuss the status of the epidemic, confer on a coordinated international response and begin the process of marshalling our collective resources to stop the spread of the disease," US Ambassador Samantha Power said Monday. The worst ever outbreak of the deadly virus has killed more than 2,400 people in West Africa, with Liberia the region's hardest hit country. The UN is appealing for 600 million for supplies as part of a massive surge of aid, with countries asked to send doctors, nurses, beds, trucks, equipment and other vehicles to the affected nations. The world body has set a goal of stopping the spread of Ebola within six to nine months but aid agencies are complaining that help is slow in reaching those in need. "Our collective response to date has not been sufficient," said Power, whose country holds the presidency of the 15 member council this month. "The situation on the ground is dire and is growing worse by the day." The US envoy did not specify what action the council was planning, but diplomats said a resolution was being prepared that could call for specific measures. UN Secretary General Ban Ki moon is planning a "high level event" on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly that opens next week to draw attention to the crisis and the need for action. Liberian Defense Minister Brownie Samukai told the council last week that the outbreak posed "a serious threat" to his country's existence and that it was "spreading like wildfire, devouring everything in its path." The tropical virus can fell its victims within days, causing severe fever and muscle pain, weakness, vomiting and diarrhea in some cases shutting down organs and causing unstoppable bleeding. No widely available vaccine or treatment exists but health experts are looking at fast tracking two potential vaccines and eight treatments, including the drug ZMapp.
By Michael Smith, North American Correspondent, MedPage Today The West Africa Ebola epidemic is a threat to international peace and security, the United Nations Security Council decided Thursday in its first ever emergency meeting on a public health crisis. In another first, the council unanimously agreed to create a special U.N. emergency health mission dubbed United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, or UNMEER to try to stem the Ebola tide. U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki moon said he aims to have advance teams on the ground in the three affected countries Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone before the end of September. "We cannot afford delays," he told the council. "The penalty for inaction is high. We need to race ahead of the outbreak and then turn and face it with all our energy and strength." The Security Council has met twice before to consider the security implications of a health crisis the HIV AIDS pandemic in both cases but has never done so on an emergency basis. And previous U.N. special missions have been deployed for such things as peacekeeping or as a response to natural disasters, but never to battle a health crisis. Indeed, a U.N. peacekeeping mission is already in Liberia to monitor a 2003 peace agreement after the country's civil war. Ban said it is "adapting its tasks to the current context." The new U.N. mission will have five priorities, Ban said "stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability, and preventing further outbreaks." President Barack Obama this week outlined similar objectives for the 3,000 strong American military mission to the region. He too argued that the continuing epidemic is more than a health crisis, it is a threat to global peace and security. "If these countries break down, if their economies break down, if people panic," he said earlier this week, "that has profound effects on all of us." The World Health Organization estimates the Ebola virus has so far infected more than 5,300 people and killed more than 2,600, Director General Margaret Chan, MD, told the council. But those numbers are almost certainly "vast underestimates," Chan said. "None of us experienced in containing outbreaks has ever seen, in our lifetimes, an emergency on this scale, with this degree of suffering and with this magnitude of cascading consequences," Chan said. The epidemic is "the biggest peacetime challenge we have ever faced," Chan said. Jackson Naimah, a physician assistant with M decins Sans Fronti res (Doctors without Borders), painted a grim picture by video link from Monrovia, the capital of Liberia. "We are trying to treat as many people as we can, but there are not nearly enough treatment centers and patient beds," Naimah told the Security Council. "We have to turn people away. And they are dying at our front door." "Right now, as I speak, people are sitting at the gates of our centers, literally begging for their lives," he said. "We do not have the capacity to respond to this crisis on its own. If the international community does not stand up, we will be wiped out," Naimah said. "We need your help. We need it now." The WHO, in a situation report issued Thursday, said Ebola treatment centers in the region are overwhelmed. Liberia, the agency said, has 315 beds, less than 20 of what's needed. Monrovia alone needs 1,210 beds, but has only 240. In Sierra Leone, 165 treatment center beds meet just 25 of the country's needs, while Guinea has 130 beds, the WHO said. While the international response is growing with the biggest single contribution so far the 3,000 U.S. troops committed this week Ban said it's not yet enough. "Our best estimate is that we need a 20 fold increase in assistance," he told the Security Council. "The spread of the disease is outpacing the response," he said. "No single government can manage the crisis on its own. The United Nations cannot do it alone." But he pointed to some bright spots, including the U.S. plan for military assistance. As well, Ban said, airports in Senegal and Spain are serving as logistical hubs and an air bridge has been established in Accra, Ghana, to help get personnel and equipment into the region. He called on airlines and shipping companies to resume service to the region. "Isolation only hampers international efforts to reach people in need," Ban said. He also argued in favor of increasing medical evacuation capacity so that "heroic international health and aid workers" can be airlifted out if they become infected.
UNITED NATIONS The UN Security Council has called the Ebola outbreak in Africa "a threat to international peace and security" and urged all countries to provide health experts, field hospitals and medical supplies to combat the rapidly accelerating disease. Secretary General Ban Ki moon said the number of Ebola cases is doubling every three weeks and is calling for a 20 fold increase in aid totaling almost 1 billion to tackle the virus' worst ever outbreak over the next six months. The UN chief told an emergency meeting of the Security Council on Thursday that the Ebola epidemic in West Africa "demands the attention of the world" and "unprecedented" action. Ban announced that he is establishing a UN emergency mission to address the unprecedented challenge. He thanked US President Barack Obama for sending 3,000 troops to provide expertise in training and engineering, read the names of about 20 other countries that have responded with contributions and urged all nations coming to the UN General Assembly ministerial meeting next week to follow suit. The 15 member council unanimously adopted a resolution after the UN secretary general warned that the number of Ebola infections already more than 5,000 was doubling every three weeks, notably in Liberia. The council heard a desperate appeal from Liberian medical aid worker Jackson Naimah for assistance to beat back the epidemic that has left at least 2,600 dead in West Africa. "Please send your helicopters, your centers, your beds and your expert personnel," said Naimah, speaking on video link from Monrovia. In its resolution, the council declared that the "unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak in Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and security" and warned that "peace building gains... could be reversed" in West Africa. It called on countries to "provide urgent assistance, including deployable medical capabilities such as field hospitals" with staff and supplies, laboratories, clinics and to provide "support capabilities for airlift." The measure also urged nations to lift travel and border restrictions, and asked airlines and shipping companies to maintain their links with affected countries. World Health Organization director Margaret Chan said the Ebola outbreak is "likely the greatest peacetime challenge that the United Nations and its agencies have ever faced." Meanwhile, Sierra Leone's normally chaotic capital resembled a ghost town on Friday as residents were confined to their homes for the start of a three day lockdown aimed at halting the deadly Ebola epidemic. Streets across Freetown, a bustling city of 1.2 million people, emptied from midnight and by dawn the rare echo of rain on tin roofs and the rumble of thunder had replaced the usual blare of motorbike horns and the din of market stall music. "Everyone seems to be complying and this is very good. This is an important way to fight Ebola. We expect everyone to stay at home," Freetown police chief Francis Munu told AFP. Shops and offices were shut across the city, and only emergency vehicles plied streets which are normally jammed with traffic throughout the day. Munu said his officers, covering the day in two shifts of 12 hours, were accompanying burial teams picking up bodies around the city and were prepared to protect them if they encountered resistance.
New York, Sept. 19 (BNA) Foreign Minister Shaikh Khalid bin Ahmed bin Mohammed Al Khalifah arrived in New York to take part in the 69th session of the United Nations General Assembly. He affirmed that Bahrain's participation in this session stems from its commitment to the principles of the United Nations Charter and its policy of positive communication and openness on all countries of the world. He underlined Bahrain's keenness to ensure success of the international organisations in carrying out their missions of achieving international peace and security and enhancing cooperation between all countries. The Foreign Minister said that such international events provide good opportunities to meet senior officials of various member states, especially countries with which Bahrain has close ties, so as to further bolster relations in various political, economic, military, social and cultural fields. Key issues on the UN General Assembly's agenda include fighting terrorism and extremism, improving women and girls health, boosting partnerships to promote development, equitable trading systems and promoting direct local and foreign investment. Discussions will also focus on mechanisms to strengthen the role of the General Assembly, reforming the Security Council, eradicating poverty and hunger and combating Ebola disease. In addition, the UN General Assembly will also discuss various Arab and international issues of concern, especially the Palestinian issue and the Syrian crisis. The General Assembly will hold a series of high level dialogues on several topics which include means of implementing the post 2015 development agenda, promoting gender equality and women's empowerment, peaceful settlement of disputes, cooperation between the United Nations and regional organisations and tackling climate change. A O Q BNA 1944 GMT 2014 09 19
Following a brutal attack 3 days ago on a team working to raise public awareness about Ebola virus disease (EVD) in Guinea, officials have arrested six people in connection with the incident, the first of its kind to result in fatalities. The attack killed eight people and occurred in Womey, in southern Guinea not far from the border with Liberia, the Associated Press (AP) reported today. Deaths included government officials, health officials, a pastor, and three radio journalists who were covering the public awareness campaign, according to the report. One person, the son of one of the government officials, escaped during the attack. The rapidly expanding outbreak, which began in March, is West Africa's first experience with EVD, and has been met with a mixture of suspicion that outsiders brought the disease to the region and disbelief that the disease exists. Also, the countries have fragile government infrastructures following years of civil war, and government messaging about the disease has been met with general mistrust. Earlier in the outbreak, attacks on treatment centers and labs prompted the temporary retreat of outbreak responders. During yesterday's United Nations (UN) emergency Security Council meeting on Ebola, Jackson Niamah, a health worker from Doctors without Borders (MSF), addressed the group via a live video link and said, "There has been so much denial, even now." Residents of Womey threw stones at the team, with some of the EVD awareness group able to flee to the nearby city of Nzerekore, while nine tried to find safety in Womey, CNN reported. Guinea's government has strongly condemned the attacks and had vowed to bring those involved to justice. In Sierra Leone today, the first day of a 3 day curfew began, a measure announced earlier this month by the government in an effort to help curb the disease and assist with contact tracing efforts. Yesterday a representative from the country told the UN Security Council, "An extraordinary disease calls for extraordinary steps." Meanwhile, a joint disaster team from the UN is headed to Liberia to assess the response status, following yesterday's Security Council adoption of an emergency health mission to battle the outbreak, according to a statement today from the group. The 15 member group includes experts from the UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the European Union, and Liberia's government. Yesterday the Security Council concluded that the outbreak posed a threat to peace and security, and UN Secretary General Ban Ki Moon announced the establishment of the UN Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER). The mission is the first in UN history to address a public health threat.
THE United Nations Security Council, in its first emergency meeting on a public health crisis on Thursday night, declared the Ebola outbreak in West Africa a threat to peace and security. Also, the Secretary General of the UN, Mr Ban Ki moon, announced that the United Nations would deploy a new emergency health mission to combat one of most horrific diseases on the planet that has shattered the lives of millions. "This international mission, to be known as the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, or UNMEER, will have five priorities stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks," Ban told the Security Council. "Under the leadership of a Special Representative of the Secretary General, the Mission will bring together the full range of UN actors and expertise in support of national efforts," he said, adding that details of the mission were sent in a letter to the Security Council and the UN General Assembly. The Secretary General said the mission's effectiveness would depend crucially on support from the international community. "Our best estimate is that we need a 20 fold increase in assistance," he said. The United Nations this week outlined a set of critical needs totalling almost 1 billion over the next six months. Ban spoke before the Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution, sponsored by 131 countries, reportedly more than any other sponsors of a resolution to date in the chamber, "determining that the unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak in Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and security." Expressing concern about the detrimental effect of the isolation of Ebola hit Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone as a result of trade and travel restrictions imposed on the affected countries, the council called on member states, including those of the region, to relax such restrictions imposed as a result of the outbreak, and to facilitate the delivery of assistance, including qualified, specialised and trained personnel and supplies to the affected countries. Briefing the council members, Dr Margaret Chan, Director General of the World Health Organisation (WHO), said "None of us experienced in containing outbreaks has ever seen, in our lifetimes, an emergency on this scale, with this degree of suffering and with this magnitude of cascading consequences." Emphasising that the current reports that showed that more than 5,500 people have been infected with Ebola and more than 2,500 killed by it in West Africa are "vast underestimates," Dr. Chan said the WHO Ebola Response Roadmap outlines 12 critical actions. "The fact that the United States, United Kingdom, China, Cuba and other countries are using a variety of assets, including military, speaks to the complexity of the challenge," she said.
In view of the dramatic situation in West Africa, an interministerial meeting on Germany's engagement in the fight against the Ebola outbreak was held at the Federal Foreign Office today (19 September), headed by State Secretary Markus Ederer. Besides supporting the United Nations emergency mission, the state secretaries agreed on the following tangible steps measures Also present at the meeting were Prof. Rolf Horstmann, Chairman of the Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, and Professor Reinhard Burger, President of the Robert Koch Institute.
"We need a 20 fold increase in assistance," says U.N. Security General The U.N. announced a new mission to combat Ebola in West Africa on Thursday, promising greater resources on the ground as cases of Ebola hit 5,335. "The gravity and scale of the situation now requires a level of international action unprecedented for a health emergency," said U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki moon at a U.N. Security Council emergency meeting on Thursday. The goal of the mission, called U.N. Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, is to stop the outbreak, treat the infected, ensure essential services are available, preserve stability and prevent further outbreaks. Ban said he plans to have a team on the ground by the end of the month. The U.N. had previously estimated that they would need an additional 1 billion to keep the number of Ebola cases in West Africa within the tens of thousands. So far 2,622 people have died from Ebola in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea alone. "Ebola matters to us all. The outbreak is the largest the world has ever seen," Ban said, calling for a 20 fold increase in assistance. "The number of cases are doubling every three weeks. There will soon be more cases in Liberia alone than the four decade history of the disease." The Security Council also unanimously passed a resolution calling countries to provide health personnel and supplies, and declared that the outbreak was a threat to international peace and security. The resolution was co sponsored by 131 countries, which is the greatest number in the council's history, according to Samantha Power, the U.S. ambassador to the U.N. UNSC Ebola resolution has 131 cosponsors, by far the most of any of the 2,176 resols since UN created. But its what happens next that counts Samantha Power ( AmbassadorPower) September 18, 2014 The meeting comes after President Obama committed a deployment of 3,000 U.S. military personnel and over 500 million in defense spending to West Africa earlier this week. Reuters reports that French President Fran ois Hollande announced the deployment of a military hospital to a remote part of Guinea. Other countries that Ban thanked for offering support so far include Canada, China, Cuba, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Ghana, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Norway, Qatar, Russia, Rwanda, South Africa, Switzerland, Uganda and the U.K. There will likely be more stepping up in the future.
TRINIDAD and Tobago has joined more than 100 countries in co sponsoring a United Nations (UN) resolution on the Ebola virus disease (EVD) which was signed on Thursday. A media release yesterday from the Foreign Affairs Ministry stated that this country joined with other UN member states in expressing deep concern over the EVD epidemic in West Africa and the resultant rapid spread of infections to neighbouring countries and beyond. The ministry noted that this was the sentiment of Member States of the Security Council and broader UN community yesterday with the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 2177. The resolution was unanimously adopted by the 15 Member States of the UN Security Council, and co sponsored by over 130 Member States of the United Nations General Assembly, including Trinidad and Tobago, Belize, Grenada, Guyana and St Lucia. The ministry pointed out that the passage of Resolution 2177 "come on the heels" of the letter sent by the Prime Minister Kamla Persad Bissessar to the Secretary General of CARICOM, Irwin La Rocque, dated September 18, 2014, "requesting that a meeting of Member States of the Community be convened to discuss and agree on sustainable policy responses at both the national and regional levels concerning public health issues, including Chikungunya and the Ebola virus". The UN Security Council declared the Ebola epidemic in West Africa as "a threat to international peace and security", and by virtue Resolution 2177 called on countries worldwide to urgently send medical personnel and supplies to contain the outbreak. The adoption of this resolution is expected to spur timely and relevant action in addressing the rapid spread of the Ebola virus disease, which has become an epidemic in several countries of West Africa, the ministry noted. UN Secretary General, Ban Ki moon, also announced a plan to set up an emergency mission, the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER). This will be a regional operational platform ensuring rapid delivery of international assistance against the needs identified in the affected States, and will work closely with all governments and partners contributing to this effort.
The Ebola outbreak in West Africa is "a threat to international peace and security", the United Nations (UN) Security Council said on 18 September, in a resolution calling for a massive increase in the resources devoted to stemming the virus's spread. The council is asking countries to send supplies and medical personnel to Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone, and seeks to loosen travel restrictions that have hampered outbreak response in those countries. The unusual resolution was co sponsored by 131 nations and approved at the first emergency council meeting organized in response to a health crisis. More than 5,300 people are thought to have been infected with Ebola during the current epidemic, and more than 2,600 have died, according to the World Health Organization (WHO) in Geneva, Switzerland. The pace of the disease's spread seems to be increasing, with the number of Ebola cases now doubling every three weeks, UN secretary general Ban Ki moon told the council. "The gravity and scale of the situation now require a level of international action unprecedented for a health emergency," he said. WHO director general Margaret Chan sounded a similarly dire warning. "This is like the greatest peace time challenge that the United Nations and its agencies have ever faced," Chan told the security council. The UN estimates that an effective response to the Ebola outbreak will cost nearly US 1 billion, double the 490 million figure put forth by the WHO on 28 August. The United States has promised a major influx of resources, with US President Barack Obama announcing on 16 September that he would send 3,000 military personnel and spend roughly 750 million to aid the Ebola fight.
NEW YORK The Security Council is unanimous on one thing its commitment to helping end the Ebola outbreak. In an historic first ever emergency Security Council meeting called on a health crisis, all 15 member states voted to declare the disease a "threat to international peace and security." Israel's ambassador Ron Prosor expressed his unequivocal support for sending aid workers and funding to Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, and said that Israel has already begun deploying NGO workers. "Israel is proud to be playing its part," Prosor said, citing tikum olam, the Jewish principle that individual's responsibility to improve the world. Israel NGOs have deployed to Sierra Leone and Cameroon, the ambassador said, to help train doctors in how to reduce the likelihood of spreading the highly communicable disease. On Friday, the General Assembly passed with all 193 member states its own Ebola resolution on Ebola, after holding open debate on the health crisis. The Assembly resolution also had the most co sponsors in UN history 134. Stable healthcare infrastructure is the first line of defense for combating epidemics such as these. Ensuring also that patients exposed to the disease know to go to a healthcare facility immediately and not to say goodbye to family members is critical for helping stop the disease. "This must be the moment when we enable nations to become the architects of their health systems rather than its victims," Prosor said. After both meetings, UN Secretary General Ban Ki Moon announced the creation of United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER) to respond to the ongoing epidemic. UNMEER"s five priorities, Ban said, are "stopping the outbreak, treating the infected, ensuring essential services, preserving stability and preventing further outbreaks." For weeks, officials from the World Health Organization, M decins Sans Fronti res, among other UN agencies have been calling on world leaders to ramp up aid to the affected countries. Director General of WHO Dr. Margaret Chan and UN Systems Coordinator for Ebola Dr. David Nabarro have spoken to the press at UN headquarters on several occasions, pleading for more resources, rather than a de facto policy of isolation. "I estimate that to get ahead of outbreak the level of response needs to be about 20 times greater than it is at the moment," Dr. Nabarro said Thursday during the Council meeting. On Thursday the Security Council finally responded to doctors' pleas. In her testimony, current Security Council president, US ambassador Samantha Power, reiterated the unprecedented speed with which this outbreak has spread. The death toll in Liberia is greater than that of the last 20 outbreaks combined, Power said. "Instead of isolating the affected countries, we call for flooding them. Flooding them with the resources that are desperately needed to turn the tide in this fight," the US ambassador said. "The math is simple the sooner we act, the more lives we save." During an appearance on The Daily Show with Jon Stewart Thursday, former US President Bill Clinton said that the WHO, UN, MSF, and US Department of Health will speak about Ebola during this year's Clinton Global Initiative. It will take a "Herculean effort" to isolate and stamp out the Ebola epidemic, the former president said.
During the first UN Security Council first emergency meeting, the UN declared Ebola as a threat to peace and security. The emergency meeting was held in New York City. The UN is concerned that the on going isolation of the hard hit Ebola countries, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone will have a detrimental effect on the people and government of the said countries. With the on going travel ban and restrictions, the UN seeks everyone's help and support to help these countries in terms of medical supplies and other assistance needed. Despite being a health issue, US Ambassador Samantha Power said this emergency meeting aims to recognize the implication of Ebola outbreak. The UN will be taking the outbreak as serious as possible as UN Secretary General declared an international mission against Ebola. The UN's mission is called United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, or UNMEER. It aims to stop the outbreak, treat the infected, make sure all services and stability remains in each country and no further outbreak will happen again.
Kenya and other countries restricting travel to and from Ebola hit countries are under intense pressure to lift the bans, despite a new forecast showing the country to be at high risk of importing the disease. The UN Security Council has called on all member countries to remove the restrictions to facilitate delivery of assistance to the affected countries. The new forecast by the North eastern University in United States puts Kenya among 16 countries at the greatest risk of importing Ebola through air travel before the end of this month. Over the weekend, the university predicted that with the current level of air travel, Kenya and other 15 countries, some outside Africa, are in a slight danger of importing the Ebola virus before the end of this month. On top of the list are Ghana, Gambia, UK, US and Morocco, with the forecast pegged on the volume of air travel between the countries and West Africa. If air travel is reduced by 80 per cent in these countries, the arrival of the virus could be delayed by about three and a half weeks, said the university in a statement. However, Health Cabinet Secretary James Macharia said Kenya is not about to lift the ban on West Africa travellers but will be reviewing the situation on a weekly basis. "We are still monitoring the situation to assess the risks. But we will soon make a decision on the flights and travel bans. We agree in principle to lift the ban but only after we are fully satisfied that it is safe to do so without compromising Kenyans' health," Macharia told a regional meeting on Ebola in Nairobi last week. BORDER SUSPECTS World Health Organisation Regional Director for Africa Luis Gomes Sambo told the meeting that countries that have suspended flights and banned travellers from the region are compromising the deployment of international staff and supplies required to tackle the outbreak. Head of disease control at the Ministry of Health William Maina however said the country has to be on high alert. "As has been demonstrated in the Ebola outbreak in Nigeria, it is evident that air travel presents a real danger in the transmission of the disease and we have to take the necessary safeguards," said Maina. "The reason for the high alerts is that we do not want to leave anything to chance. We are testing even border suspects," Maina added. Maina said although Kenya has a Sh671 million war chest against the disease, it faces some challenges especially from foreigners who are traveling from the affected countries to a third nation before coming to Kenya. He noted that in some cases, the foreigners are hiding their travel history.
T T has pledged to support efforts to address the Ebola crisis in the affected countries and to prevent its spread to other regions. The United Nations Security Council declared the Ebola epidemic in West Africa as "a threat to international peace and security", and by virtue Resolution 2177 called on countries worldwide to urgently send medical personnel and supplies to contain the outbreak. A statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said the adoption of this resolution is expected to spur timely and relevant action in addressing the rapid spread of the Ebola virus disease, which has become an epidemic in several countries of West Africa. United Nations secretary general Ban Ki moon also announced a plan to set up an emergency mission, the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER). "This will be a regional operational platform ensuring rapid delivery of international assistance against the needs identified in the affected states, and will work closely with all Governments and partners contributing to this effort." The resolution was unanimously adopted by the 15 Member States of the UN Security Council, and co sponsored by more than 130 Member States of the United Nations General Assembly, including Trinidad and Tobago, Belize, Grenada, Guyana and St Lucia. The passage of Resolution 2177 comes on the heels of the letter sent by Prime Minister Kamla Persad Bissessar to the secretary general of Caricom dated September 18, requesting that a meeting of Member States of the Community be convened to discuss and agree on sustainable policy responses at both the national and regional levels concerning public health issues, including Chikungunya and the Ebola virus. It represented only the third time in the history of the Security Council that a resolution was adopted to address an international public health issue, which has the potential to undermine international peace and security. "This emphasises the fact that without concerted action at the global level, the epidemic could become pandemic."
Dr. Marie Paule Kieny, an assistant director general for WHO, said preliminary safety data on both vaccines should be available by December. Twenty human subjects have already been injected with the American vaccine in one of the safety trials, and by the end of November or early December researchers will know whether it is safe, said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). The agency is developing this vaccine with drug maker GlaxoSmithKline. "I don't know if that's going to be the best one, but that's the one farthest along in terms of development," Fauci said. At the same time, Canada has started shipping its own experimental vaccine to WHO, sending 800 vials for possible use in West Africa. Those vials are expected to arrive in Switzerland on Wednesday for testing among volunteers in Geneva, Hamburg, Germany, and the African nations of Gabon and Kenya, according to the AP. "These data are absolutely crucial to allow decision making on what dose level should go in the efficacy testing in Africa," Kieny said. "We expect, we hope, to have a go ahead by the end of the month." That would allow the vaccine to be shipped for use in West Africa immediately afterward. The Canadian vaccine is being produced by the Public Health Agency of Canada and NewLink Genetics, a U.S. firm that holds the license for the vaccine. The Canadian vaccine has also entered the human testing stage in the United States, with about 40 volunteers at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in Maryland receiving a dose, according to Canadian Health Minister Rona Ambrose. The American and Canadian vaccines appear to be the most promising, in that they are far enough along that they might be put into use during the current Ebola epidemic, said Dr. Craig Smith, medical director of infectious diseases at University Health Care System in Augusta, Ga. "Both of these vaccines are the top choices for availability and production," Smith said. "They're not ready for prime time if it wasn't an emergency situation, but they are the ones the World Health Organization is supporting." The two vaccines both aim to create immunity to Ebola through the use of a simpler, less harmful virus into which Ebola genetics have been spliced, Smith said. The American vaccine uses a chimpanzee cold virus, called chimp adenovirus type 3, to deliver Ebola genetic material to human cells. The Canadian vaccine uses a virus common to cattle and horses called vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), which is in the same viral family as the rabies virus but causes only flu like symptoms in infected humans. The goal of both vaccines is to trigger an immune system response that creates antibodies that will defend the body against Ebola infection. Both have shown promise in animal trials. There are several other Ebola vaccines in development. Researchers at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia have developed an Ebola vaccine that piggybacks on the established rabies virus vaccine, for example. But the other vaccines are not likely to be ready in time for this epidemic. "It's not that they aren't good, it's just that they aren't farther along in development," Fauci explained. It's an open question whether any of these vaccines will be available in time and in large enough quantities to do any good. Alan Barrett, director of the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development at the University of Texas Medical Branch, said that even with a revved up testing schedule, "having a vaccine that would have an effect on this epidemic is unlikely. It's just not going to be ready in time." But if the epidemic is still raging into early 2015 and the vaccines prove safe, Barrett said health care workers likely will be the first people in West Africa to receive inoculations. "Clearly, you want your health care workers immunized, because otherwise they can't help those who are ill," he said. Which people next receive the vaccine will be a matter of both scientific and ethical debate, Barrett said. The vaccine must be used in a way that can prove its clinical effectiveness, but with thousands dying it may be difficult to stick to such standards. WHO likely will use a technique called "cluster randomization" to test the effectiveness of Ebola vaccines, Smith said. "As the vaccine becomes available, you vaccinate everyone in one village, and then compare their progress to that of other unvaccinated villages," he said. "That way, you're not using placebo. If you go in to vaccinate a village, they know that they are all going to get the vaccine." Smith said this type of clinical trial is not commonly used "because placebo control studies are the gold standard," but it would likely need to be used in the face of a deadly epidemic. More than 4,500 people have already died from the Ebola virus, and public health experts have said there could be 10,000 new cases a week by the end of the year if stronger measures to fight the often deadly virus are not taken.
The World Health Organization said Tuesday that doses of experimental Ebola vaccines could be available for testing in West Africa as soon as January. (AP) Researchers racing to develop a vaccine that could help halt the Ebola epidemic are getting good news Early human clinical trials of one leading candidate, involving small groups of volunteers in the United States and Europe, suggest that the vaccine is safe. But the most fraught part of the unprecedented effort lies ahead Testing the effectiveness of potential vaccines on tens of thousands of people in Ebola stricken areas of West Africa. That task, which the World Health Organization expects will begin in January, is raising hard questions for scientists and governments With the epidemic raging, is it acceptable to conduct a randomized controlled trial, considered the "gold standard" of research? That would produce the best and quickest data but would mean some participants would not be given a potentially live saving vaccine. There are logistical challenges as well How can vaccines be safely transported and kept at the cold temperatures required in areas without reliable electricity? And how do you recruit and track volunteers during the middle of an epidemic, in countries with shattered health care systems? Experts are rushing to answer these difficult questions on a timetable unheard of in the world of drug development. "Six months ago, this was not on anybody's radar," said Ripley Ballou, a former U.S. Army researcher who is a vice president at GlaxoSmithKline, which is developing one of the potential Ebola vaccines with the National Institutes of Health. "Something that normally takes five to seven years to do, we're compressing into a matter of months. . . . We're going to be pushing the system awfully hard to make this happen." Now, with the epidemic deepening by the day in West Africa and traditional public health methods for containing the virus so far unable to keep up with its rapid spread, some officials have speculated that a vaccine might be the only way left to suppress the outbreak, which has resulted in nearly 10,000 reported cases and almost 5,000 deaths in the affected countries. Jeremy Farrar, director of the London based medical charity the Wellcome Trust, which has helped fund the GSK vaccine and other Ebola research, says it's possible the epidemic has "gone beyond the capacity" of tactics such as quarantining and contact tracing to stop its spread. "We have to have a Plan B," he said. Anthony Fauci, head of NIH's National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, agrees that the global effort to stop the outbreak might not be sufficient or arrive quickly enough to halt the spread of Ebola in West Africa. "It is conceivable that you will actually need a vaccine to stop the epidemic," Fauci said. "It won't just be a commodity for health care workers. It will be an essential tool to try to turn the epidemic around." But first, scientists must prove that a vaccine works. The vaccine being developed by England based GSK is one of two that health care leaders hope could be ready to begin distributing on a broader scale later next year in the hard hit countries of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. Based on a chimpanzee cold virus called chimp adenovirus type 3, the vaccine is designed to deliver pieces of genetic material from two Ebola species Sudan and Zaire, the type responsible for the epidemic in West Africa. The vaccine, which cannot actually infect those who receive it and is designed to trigger an immune response in the patient, has shown promising results in animal trials. Initial results from small human safety trials at the NIH and Oxford another trial began recently in Mali have shown no signs of harm. Researchers expect more robust safety data later this year, including on what doses prompt the appropriate immune response. Already, GSK is taking steps to ramp up production of the vaccine and to begin much larger trials, which could involve as many as 20,000 to 30,000 people, in the Ebola affected countries in West Africa. But researchers are still figuring out exactly how to design and carry out those trials. At a recent WHO gathering, Ballou made a forceful argument for conducting a randomized control trial, in which half of the patients, possibly health workers, would receive doses of the vaccine, while the other half would receive a different vaccine, perhaps for hepatitis B. Researchers would monitor both groups to see if fewer infections occur in the group that gets the vaccine. If data suggest the vaccine works, the trial could end and mass vaccination could begin. "It could happen very fast," Ballou said. "The intent would be collecting and analyzing the data in as close to real time as possible. . . . As soon as we're convinced the vaccine works, or doesn't work, we stop the trial. If it works, everybody gets the vaccine. If it doesn't work, we stop the trial and stop giving out the vaccine." There was widespread agreement at the recent WHO meeting that such a trial would provide the best data in the shortest amount of time. But some experts have wondered whether it would be ethical to have a control group in settings such as Ebola clinics in West Africa, where workers are at heightened risk of contracting the deadly disease. Still others said it could be preferable to do a "step wedge" trial, in which certain groups of volunteers are vaccinated sequentially. That approach ensures all patients in a trial eventually do receive the drug the later groups act as a control for the first recipients but the data tends to be less reliable and slower in coming. Ballou and other researchers said they have no ethical dilemma in having a control group in West Africa, assuming the individual governments sign off on the plan. They note there are limited supplies of the vaccine, and there is no guarantee those receiving it will be better off than those who do not. "You really don't know the vaccine could be harmful," said Ira Longini, a biostatistician at the University of Florida who has long studied infectious disease outbreaks. "Without doing a randomized controlled trial, we will not know what the efficacy is of the vaccine. We shouldn't be mass vaccinating with a vaccine where we don't have a clear estimate that it's at least not harmful." Fauci added it is important to acknowledge cultural sensitivities as well. "The last thing in the world you want to do is to widely distribute . . . a vaccine to black West Africa, made by the white Western world, and it turns out to not only not be effective, but it turns out to actually have a paradoxical negative effect," Fauci said. In addition, Ballou said GSK needs the most solid information it can get to persuade regulators to ultimately approve a vaccine, and to make sure it reliably works so that it could be deployed in future outbreaks. "If you don't start with sound data, all of this is angels dancing on the head of a pin," he said. Farrar said that whatever trial design scientists ultimately choose, the key is not to debate it for months. "We just need to make those decisions and move on," he said. Even when researchers settle on the structure for human trials in West Africa, carrying them out will be difficult. The GSK vaccine must be kept at a constant 80 degrees Celsius. Researchers must recruit willing volunteers for the trials, then keep track of both vaccinated and unvaccinated people. "It's a large, complicated operation, and it's not easy to do in a developing country," Longini said. "Not to mention the fact this would be done on an emergency basis, in a chaotic situation, in a place with very poor public health infrastructure." Marie Paule Kieny, a WHO assistant director general, alluded to those challenges on Tuesday in announcing the push to get vaccine trials underway by January in West Africa. "It's a very fragile situation in these countries," she said. "Politically not terribly stable there are safety issues there are concerns about logistics." Those potential hurdles are what keep Ballou up at night. "My biggest fear is we'll have a good vaccine, a great plan, and we just won't be able to do it because it's not feasible," he said. Meanwhile, trials are underway on another leading vaccine candidate, developed by the Public Health Agency of Canada and licensed to a small Iowa based company called NewLink Genetics. Initial safety trials began recently at Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in Silver Spring, and will soon begin in Germany, Switzerland, Gabon and Kenya. Early results are expected in December, and broader trials in West Africa also could start the beginning of 2015, said the WHO's Kieny. "It's very important that both of these vaccines are developed in parallel," Farrar said. "It's absolutely critical that we don't put all our eggs in one basket, that we don't just have a single option here." Other potential vaccines also lie on the horizon. Johnson Johnson announced this week that, in collaboration with the NIH, it is committing up to 200 million to accelerate its own Ebola vaccine, with a goal of beginning human trials early next year and producing 250,000 doses by May. Researchers at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia are working on yet another potential vaccine, and the WHO's Kieny said the group is trying to get more details about other vaccines under development in Russia. Meanwhile, Ballou said, GSK is preparing to move its Ebola vaccine production from Rome to Belgium, where it has a much larger facility. "We're producing as much of it as we can, as fast as we can," he said, adding that the company will need to make stockpiles of the vaccine not only for this epidemic, but for future ones. And if it turns out that after producing all that vaccine, it doesn't actually work? "This is such a human tragedy, and there are so many people losing their lives and so much potential for it to get even worse," Longini said. "Throwing away a few million doses of vaccine pales in comparison to how much good a vaccine could do."
The World Health Organization (WHO) has said that an experimental Ebola vaccine could be in use by January. Assistant Director of the WHO, Dr. Marie Paule Kieny said in Geneva on Tuesday, October 21 that trials of the vaccine were ongoing and if deemed safe, a West African trial could then be conducted in January. Tens of thousands of doses of the vaccine would reportedly be made available for the trials but it is not clear when the said vaccine would be mass produced so as to be widely available. There is currently no cure or vaccine for the disease but experimental drugs and the blood of survivors has been used to treat the infected. The current Ebola outbreak has killed almost 5000 people mostly in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea.
GALVESTON, Texas Almost a decade ago, scientists from Canada and the United States reported that they had created a vaccine that was 100 percent effective in protecting monkeys against the Ebola virus. The results were published in a respected journal, and health officials called them exciting. The researchers said tests in people might start within two years, and a product could potentially be ready for licensing by 2010 or 2011. It never happened. The vaccine sat on a shelf. Only now, with nearly 5,000 people dead from Ebola and an epidemic raging out of control in West Africa, is the vaccine undergoing the most basic safety tests in humans. Its development stalled in part because Ebola was rare, and until now outbreaks had infected only a few hundred people at a time. But experts also acknowledge that the lack of follow up on such a promising candidate reflects a broader failure to produce medicines and vaccines for diseases that afflict poor countries. Most drug companies have resisted spending the enormous sums needed to develop products useful mostly to poor countries with little ability to pay for them. Now, as the growing epidemic devastates West Africa and is seen as a potential threat to other regions as well, governments and aid groups have begun to open their wallets. A flurry of research to test drugs and vaccines is underway, with clinical trials starting for several candidates, including the vaccine produced nearly a decade ago. With no vaccines or proven drugs currently available, the stepped up efforts are a desperate measure to stop a disease that has defied traditional means of containing it. "There's never been a big market for Ebola vaccines," said Thomas W. Geisbert, an Ebola expert here at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston and one of the developers of the vaccine that worked so well in monkeys. "So big pharma, who are they going to sell it to?" Geisbert added "It takes a crisis sometimes to get people talking. 'OK. We've got to do something here.'" Dr. James E. Crowe Jr., director of a vaccine research center at Vanderbilt University, said that academic researchers who develop a prototype drug or vaccine that works in animals often encountered a "biotech valley of death" in which no drug company would help them cross the finish line. Up to that point, the research may have cost a few million dollars, but tests in humans and scaling up production can cost hundreds of millions, and bringing a new vaccine all the way to market typically costs 1 billion to 1.5 billion, Crowe said. "Who's going to pay for that?" he asked. "People invest in order to get money back," Crowe added. The Ebola vaccine on which Geisbert collaborated is made from another virus, vesicular stomatitis virus, which causes a mouth disease in cattle but rarely infects people. It had already been used successfully in making other vaccines. The researchers altered VSV by removing one of its genes rendering the virus harmless and inserting a gene from Ebola. The transplanted gene forces VSV to sprout Ebola proteins on its surface. The proteins cannot cause illness, but they provoke an immune response that in monkeys, considered a good surrogate for humans, fought off the disease. The vaccine was actually produced, in Winnipeg by the Public Health Agency of Canada. The Canadian government patented it, and 800 to 1,000 vials of the vaccine were produced. In 2010, it licensed the vaccine, known as VSV EBOV, to NewLink Genetics, in Ames, Iowa. The Canadian government donated the existing vials to the World Health Organization, and safety tests of the vaccine in healthy volunteers have already begun.
GALVESTON, Tex. Almost a decade ago, scientists from Canada and the United States reported that they had created a vaccine that was 100 percent effective in protecting monkeys against the Ebola virus. The results were published in a respected journal, and health officials called them exciting. The researchers said tests in people might start within two years, and a product could potentially be ready for licensing by 2010 or 2011. It never happened. The vaccine sat on a shelf. Only now, with nearly 5,000 people dead from Ebola and an epidemic raging out of control in West Africa, is the vaccine undergoing the most basic safety tests in humans. Its development stalled in part because Ebola was rare, and until now outbreaks had infected only a few hundred people at a time. But experts also acknowledge that the lack of follow up on such a promising candidate reflects a broader failure to produce medicines and vaccines for diseases that afflict poor countries. Most drug companies have resisted spending the enormous sums needed to to develop products useful mostly to poor countries with little ability to pay for them. Now, as the growing epidemic devastates West Africa and is seen as a potential threat to other regions as well, governments and aid groups have begun to open their wallets. A flurry of research to test drugs and vaccines is underway, with clinical trials starting for several candidates, including the vaccine produced nearly a decade ago. With no vaccines or proven drugs currently available, the stepped up efforts are a desperate measure to stop a disease that has defied traditional means of containing it. "There's never been a big market for Ebola vaccines," said Thomas W. Geisbert, an Ebola expert here at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston, and one of the developers of the vaccine that worked so well in monkeys. "So big pharma, who are they going to sell it to?" Dr. Geisbert added "It takes a crisis sometimes to get people talking. 'Ok. We've got to do something here.' " Dr. James E. Crowe Jr., director of a vaccine research center at Vanderbilt University, said that academic researchers who develop a prototype drug or vaccine that works in animals often encountered a "biotech valley of death" in which no drug company would help them cross the finish line. Up to that point, the research may have cost a few million dollars, but tests in humans and scaling up production can cost hundreds of millions, and bringing a new vaccine all the way to market typically costs 1 billion to 1.5 billion, Dr. Crowe said. "Who's going to pay for that?" he asked. "People invest in order to get money back," Dr. Crowe added. The Ebola vaccine on which Dr. Geisbert collaborated is made from another virus, V.S.V., for vesicular stomatitis virus, which causes a mouth disease in cattle but rarely infects people. It had already been used successfully in making other vaccines. The researchers altered V.S.V. by removing one of its genes rendering the virus harmless and inserting a gene from Ebola. The transplanted gene forces V.S.V. to sprout Ebola proteins on its surface. The proteins cannot cause illness, but they provoke an immune response that in monkeys, considered a good surrogate for humans, fought off the disease. The vaccine was actually produced, in Winnipeg by the Public Health Agency of Canada. The Canadian government patented it, and 800 to 1,000 vials of the vaccine were produced. In 2010, it licensed the vaccine, known as VSV EBOV, to NewLink Genetics, in Ames, Iowa. The Canadian government donated the existing vials to the World Health Organization, and safety tests of the vaccine in healthy volunteers have already begun.
Gov. Rick Perry toured the UTMB Level 4 Biosafety lab in Galveston recently with professor Tom Geisbert, right. An Ebola vaccine, developed by a University of Texas Medical Branch scientist and a Canadian collaborator, is moving to human trials more than a decade after it proved 100 percent effective in monkey trials.
A potential Ebola vaccine was reportedly put on the shelf for nearly a decade. Scientists in the United States and Canada stated they had developed a vaccine that was allegedly 100 percent effective in defending monkeys from the Ebola disease. Such results were said to have been published in an unnamed science journal, and health officials stated that they were exhilarated. The researchers exclaimed that tests in humans could begin within two years, and a vaccine might possibly be ready for licensing by 2010. However, this never came to pass. The serum remained sitting on some shelf and now there are almost 5,000 individuals dead from the Ebola virus. An epidemic is running rampant in West Africa and the vaccine is now only in the most basic of welfare tests in human beings. Its progress became halted in part due to the fact the illness was uncommon, and up to the present time outbreaks had only infested a couple hundred people at any one time. However, professionals also admitted that the failure of any follow ups of such an encouraging prospect reflected a much larger failure to harvest vaccines and medicines needed for illnesses that affected poorer countries. Most drug companies avoid spending large amounts of money to produce vaccines for poor countries that have little to no capability to pay for them. Now, as the increasing epidemic overwhelms West Africa and is also seen as a possible danger to other countries, aid type groups and various governments have started opening their checkbooks. An outbreak of examination to assess vaccines and drugs has started, with clinical observations have began like never before. There is also one for the vaccine created 10 years ago. Without any medications presently on the market, the rushed up efforts are a frantic measure to halt an illness which has rebelled against any traditional ways of controlling it. Previously, there was not much interest in developing an Ebola vaccine simply because drug companies did not quite understand how to mass market it. It had to take an epidemic such as what has presently occurred to start the market doing its job. Researchers who have created a sample vaccine, which works in monkeys often find that none of the big drug companies will aid them in going on over in crossing the finish line. They might have spent somewhere around a few million dollars up to that time but when they have to begin testing in actual human begins, the costs go up past the hundreds of millions in dollars marks. When scientists want to attempt to bring a brand new vaccine to the drug market, it can cost nearly 2 billion to get started. Anyone who invests in such drugs expects to get paid back his or her investment. The Ebola vaccine that was basically forgotten about is produced from another virus known as vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). It creates a disease of the mouth in cattle but hardly ever infects humans. It has also been used to make other vaccines as well. Scientists changed VSV by taking out one of its genes and making the virus innocuous. They then took one of the Ebola virus genes and implanted it in the VSV. The displaced gene makes VSV bud Ebola proteins on its exterior. The proteins are unable to cause the virus, but they incite an immune response that from monkeys, which are thought to be good substitutes for people, were able to fight off the virus. The World Health Organization has started performing tests of the vaccine on volunteers.
Dr. Thomas Geisbert, a scientist at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, was at a conference in Germany in 2000 when he and a Canadian collaborator decided to work together on a vaccine against the deadly Ebola virus.
Federal officials and pharmaceutical companies are planning in the near future to start two large clinical trials of Ebola vaccines in West African countries devastated by the outbreak, a government official said Thursday. The trials will run separately one in Liberia, the other in Sierra Leone and involve different designs to ensure at least one produces usable information. "It's very important to make sure that, given how challenging these trials might be, that we take no chances, that we have more than one trial going on," this official said, speaking on condition of anonymity because the studies have not been formally announced. The World Health Organization held a meeting in Geneva on Thursday involving governments, pharmaceutical companies and charities, among others, to discuss Ebola vaccine trials. Conclusions of the meeting are expected to be announced Friday. W.H.O. officials said earlier this week that trials of two vaccines furthest along in development would start in West Africa as early as January. But the details have not been known. Participants will be people at high risk of infection, including health care workers and possibly others, including burial workers and those caring for family members with the disease. The trials will be challenging because health care systems in countries with Ebola are breaking down. And there are sensitive issues such as whether to give some participants a placebo. A placebo controlled trial can produce the quickest answers about whether a vaccine works, experts say. But some critics have said it is unethical to offer people placebos instead of a vaccine that might save their lives. One trial will test the two vaccines against each other and against a control. One third of participants will receive a vaccine being developed by GlaxoSmithKline. Another third will receive a Canadian vaccine licensed to NewLink Genetics. The rest will get a vaccine for a disease other than Ebola, such as flu essentially a placebo in terms of preventing Ebola infection. That trial will probably involve about 9,000 people in each segment, the official said. It will take place in Liberia under the auspices of the National Institutes of Health and Liberia's Health Ministry. For the other trial, everyone at a particular site, such as a treatment center, will be offered a vaccine. Different centers will offer vaccines at different times. In that design, no one gets a placebo. That study will take place in Sierra Leone and is being planned by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
GALVESTON, Texas Almost a decade ago, scientists from Canada and the United States reported that they had created a vaccine that was 100 percent effective in protecting monkeys against the Ebola virus. The results were published in a respected journal, and health officials called them exciting. The researchers said tests in people might start within two years, and a product could potentially be ready for licensing by 2010 or 2011. It never happened. The vaccine sat on a shelf. Only now, with nearly 5,000 people dead from Ebola and an epidemic raging out of control in West Africa, is the vaccine undergoing the most basic safety tests in humans. Its development stalled in part because Ebola was rare, and until now outbreaks had infected only a few hundred people at a time. But experts also acknowledge that the lack of follow up on such a promising candidate reflects a broader failure to produce medicines and vaccines for diseases that afflict poor countries. Most drug companies have resisted spending the enormous sums needed to develop products useful mostly to poor countries with little ability to pay for them. Now, as the growing epidemic devastates West Africa and is seen as a potential threat to other regions as well, governments and aid groups have begun to open their wallets. A flurry of research to test drugs and vaccines is underway, with clinical trials starting for several candidates, including the vaccine produced nearly a decade ago. With no vaccines or proven drugs currently available, the stepped up efforts are a desperate measure to stop a disease that has defied traditional means of containing it. "There's never been a big market for Ebola vaccines," said Thomas W. Geisbert, an Ebola expert here at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston and one of the developers of the vaccine that worked so well in monkeys. "So big pharma, who are they going to sell it to?" Geisbert added "It takes a crisis sometimes to get people talking. 'OK. We've got to do something here.'" Dr. James E. Crowe Jr., director of a vaccine research center at Vanderbilt University, said that academic researchers who develop a prototype drug or vaccine that works in animals often encountered a "biotech valley of death" in which no drug company would help them cross the finish line. Up to that point, the research may have cost a few million dollars, but tests in humans and scaling up production can cost hundreds of millions, and bringing a new vaccine all the way to market typically costs 1 billion to 1.5 billion, Crowe said. "People invest in order to get money back," Crowe added. The Ebola vaccine on which Geisbert collaborated is made from another virus, vesicular stomatitis virus, which causes a mouth disease in cattle but rarely infects people. It had already been used successfully in making other vaccines. The researchers altered VSV by removing one of its genes rendering the virus harmless and inserting a gene from Ebola. The transplanted gene forces VSV to sprout Ebola proteins on its surface. The proteins cannot cause illness, but they provoke an immune response that in monkeys, considered a good surrogate for humans, fought off the disease. The vaccine was actually produced, in Winnipeg by the Public Health Agency of Canada. The Canadian government patented it, and 800 to 1,000 vials of the vaccine were produced. In 2010, it licensed the vaccine, known as VSV EBOV, to NewLink Genetics, in Ames, Iowa. The Canadian government donated the existing vials to the World Health Organization, and safety tests of the vaccine in healthy volunteers have already begun.
GlaxoSmithKline GlaxoSmithKline is considered by many a leading contender for delivering an Ebola vaccine at scale. Recent quotes by the Head of Ebola vaccine research for GSK, however, are sobering and indicate the enormous challenges ahead in the race to deliver a safe and effective vaccine in the quantities needed for the unprecedented outbreak in West Africa. "The thing that is going to have the biggest impact is what is happening to the trajectory of the epidemic curve. If you progress the current trends 2 months into the future are we still in an environment where you can even consider doing a trial?" Dr. Ripley Ballou Head of Ebola Vaccine Research, GSK (via ScienceInsider here) At the GSK vaccine research facility outside of Brussels, they are working to squeeze 10 years of trial activity into 12 months. The hope is to have 20,000 doses ready to be tested by health workers early next year. "At the same time we have to be able to manufacture the vaccine at doses that would be consistent with general use, and that's going to take well into 2016 to be able to do that. I don't think this vaccine can be seen as the primary answer to this particular outbreak. If it does work then to be able to be prepared so that we don't have to go through this again in five years, or whenever the next epidemic is going to break out." Dr. Ripley Ballou Head of Ebola Vaccine Research, GSK (BBC News Health here) Earlier today, ScienceInsider published results (here) from leaked documents used in discussions with the World Health Organization (WHO), government officials and vaccine manufacturers. Included in those documents was this GSK chart outlining a possible timeline for delivering 230,000 vaccines by April 2015 and then scaling to 1 million by December 2015. Some of the other challenges referenced in their findings include Producing a vaccine in such large quantities ("fill capacity") and the effect this would have on other vaccines currently in production (rotavirus, measles, mumps and rubella) Liability relief from regulators for producers and distributors of several vaccine candidates used in multiple human trials Costs estimated at 73 million for 27 million does of the vaccine and another 78 million for the actual vaccine campaigns Safe and secure transport and storage (with needed refrigeration throughout the delivery chain) Unfortunately, modeling and forecasting the effects of a successful vaccine like the one that GSK and others are working on are less than encouraging. At least one study suggests that while a successful vaccine may reduce the mortality rate of those infected, it will do little to slow the transmission. "The hypothetical mass application of a novel pharmaceutical like the one administered to two American aid workers had a much smaller impact on the course of the epidemic itself. While certainly lessening the burden of mortality of those infected (in the most optimistic scenario modeled, reducing the case fatality rate from 50 to 12.5 ), the downstream effects of such an intervention are relatively minor, as there is no suggestion that any candidate treatments have a substantial impact on transmission." "These results also suggest that the epidemic has progressed beyond the point wherein it will be readily and swiftly addressed by conventional public health strategies. The forecasts for both Liberia and Sierra Leone in the absence of any major effort to contain the epidemic paint a bleak picture of its future progress, which suggests that we are in the opening phase of the epidemic, rather than near its peak." Modeling the Impact of Interventions on an Epidemic of Ebola in Sierra Leone and Liberia (Public Library of Science here) A more accurate forecast of Ebola's endgame for this outbreak could well be what happened with the 2003 SARS outbreak in China. How to Shut Down A Country and Kill a Disease was written yesterday by Laurie Garrett a senior fellow for global health at the Council on Foreign Relations and a Pulitzer Prize winning science writer. Based on her own first hand experience with SARS in China, she concluded with this assessment. If the world cannot manage to muster promised monies and mobilize far more personnel and equipment to confront the epidemic, the governments of Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Liberia may be compelled to implement strategies as severe as China's SARS endgame, dragging thousands into isolation without respect for their rights or civil liberties, and even at gunpoint. The world must not compel such hellish action. The less odious, more humane alternative of building quality treatment centers on a scale to actually absorb thousands of needy patients and provide meaningful care that improves survival and thus lures Ebola sufferers out of hiding could still work today. It is hugely expensive, and it demands thousands of skilled health workers and support staff from all over the world. But in the absence of ample aid, three nations that nobly came back from the horrors of civil war into their dawns of democracy may be forced backward into an Ebola authoritarian horror.
GALVESTON, Texas Almost a decade ago, scientists from Canada and the United States reported that they had created a vaccine that was 100 percent effective in protecting monkeys against the Ebola virus. The results were published in a respected journal, and health officials called them exciting. The researchers said tests in people might start within two years and a product could potentially be ready for licensing by 2010 or 2011. It never happened. The vaccine sat on a shelf. Only now is it undergoing the most basic safety tests in humans with nearly 5,000 people dead from Ebola and an epidemic raging out of control in West Africa. Its development stalled in part because Ebola is rare and until now outbreaks had infected only a few hundred people at a time. But experts also acknowledge that the lack of follow up on such a promising candidate reflects a broader failure to produce medicines and vaccines for diseases that afflict poor countries. Most drug companies have resisted spending the enormous sums needed to develop products useful mostly to countries with little ability to pay. Now, as the growing epidemic devastates West Africa and is seen as a potential threat to other regions as well, governments and aid groups have begun to open their wallets. A flurry of research to test drugs and vaccines is underway, with studies starting for several candidates, including the vaccine produced nearly a decade ago. A federal official said in an interview Thursday that two large studies involving thousands of patients were planned to begin soon in West Africa and were expected to be described in detail Friday by the World Health Organization. With no vaccines or proven drugs available, the stepped up efforts are a desperate measure to stop a disease that has defied traditional means of containing it. "There's never been a big market for Ebola vaccines," said Thomas W. Geisbert, an Ebola expert at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston and one of the developers of the vaccine that worked so well in monkeys. "So big pharma, who are they going to sell it to?" Geisbert added "It takes a crisis sometimes to get people talking. 'OK. We've got to do something here.'" Dr. James E. Crowe Jr., director of a vaccine research center at Vanderbilt University, said that academic researchers who develop a prototype drug or vaccine that works in animals often encounter a "biotech valley of death" in which no drug company will help them cross the finish line. The Ebola vaccine on which Geisbert collaborated is made from another virus, vesicular stomatitis virus, which causes a mouth disease in cattle but rarely infects people. It had already been used successfully in making other vaccines. The researchers altered VSV by removing one of its genes, rendering the virus harmless, and inserting a gene from Ebola. The transplanted gene forces VSV to sprout Ebola proteins on its surface. The proteins cannot cause illness, but they provoke an immune response that in monkeys, considered a good surrogate for humans, fought off the disease. The vaccine was actually produced, in Winnipeg by the Public Health Agency of Canada. The Canadian government patented it, and 800 to 1,000 vials of the vaccine were produced. In 2010, it licensed the vaccine, known as VSV EBOV, to NewLink Genetics, in Ames, Iowa. The Canadian government donated the existing vials to the World Health Organization, and safety tests of the vaccine in healthy volunteers have already begun. NewLink's product is one of two leading vaccines being tested. The other, which uses a cold virus that infects chimpanzees, was developed by researchers at the National Institutes of Health and Glaxo SmithKline. The first tests of an earlier version of it, employing a different cold virus, began in 2003. Several other vaccine candidates, not as far along, are also in the pipeline and may be ready for safety testing next year. Once any drugs or treatments pass the safety tests they will be available for use in larger numbers of people, and health officials are grappling with whether they should be tested for efficacy in the traditional way, in which some people at risk are given placebos instead of the active drug. Governments and the military became interested in making vaccines against Ebola and a related virus, Marburg, during the 1990s after a Soviet defector said the Russians had found a way to weaponize Marburg and load it into warheads. Concerns intensified in 2001 after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and anthrax mailings. The government money led to major advances in the laboratory, Geisbert said, but was insufficient to cover the huge costs of human trials. Nor could the small companies that were involved in the early studies in animals afford to pay for human trials. No finished product came to market. Geisbert moved on, working on treatments for Ebola and another version of the VSV vaccine. For the vaccine work, his main collaborator has been Dr. Heinz Feldmann, chief of virology at the Rocky Mountain Laboratories in Hamilton, Mont., part of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
GALVESTON, Texas Almost a decade ago, scientists from Canada and the United States reported that they had created a vaccine that was 100 percent effective in protecting monkeys against the Ebola virus. The results were published in a respected journal, and health officials called them exciting. The researchers said tests in people might start within two years, and a product could potentially be ready for licensing by 2010 or 2011. It never happened. The vaccine sat on a shelf. Only now, with nearly 5,000 people dead from Ebola and an epidemic raging out of control in West Africa, is the vaccine undergoing the most basic safety tests in humans. Its development stalled in part because Ebola was rare, and until now outbreaks had infected only a few hundred people at a time. But experts also acknowledge that the lack of follow up on such a promising candidate reflects a broader failure to produce medicines and vaccines for diseases that afflict poor countries. Most drug companies have resisted spending the enormous sums needed to develop products useful mostly to poor countries with little ability to pay for them. Now, as the growing epidemic devastates West Africa and is seen as a potential threat to other regions as well, governments and aid groups have begun to open their wallets. A flurry of research to test drugs and vaccines is underway, with clinical trials starting for several candidates, including the vaccine produced nearly a decade ago. The vaccine was produced in Winnipeg by the Public Health Agency of Canada. The Canadian government patented it, and 800 to 1,000 vials of the vaccine were produced.
Trials of a possible ebola vaccine could begin in west Africa in December with the vaccine more widely available in the first half of next year. World Health Organisation assistant director general Marie Paule Kieny said "Before the end of first half of 2015...we could have available a few hundred thousand doses. That could be 200,000 it could be less or could be more." She was speaking after WHO held talks about potential vaccines with health experts, officials from ebola affected nations and pharmaceutical firms. There is currently no proven vaccine against the deadly virus and drug companies have previously avoided investing too heavily in a cure because outbreaks before this year's had been small. West Africa's ebola outbreak began in March and has killed more than 4,900 people, most of them in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, according to the WHO. It believes that up to 1.4 million people could have been affected by 2015 and there are also fears the virus may be used as a weapon of bio terrorism. Two leading vaccine contenders are already in trials, with another five to begin trials next year. US firm Johnson Johnson (NYSE JNJ news) have already said they aim to produce at least one million doses of their vaccine next year and UK based GlaxoSmithKiline is also working on a vaccine called ChAd3. GSK's chief executive Sir Andrew Witty said earlier that this week's meeting of health experts should discuss ways to make sure all drug companies worked together to get the vaccine out.
GALVESTON, Tex. Almost a decade ago, scientists from Canada and the United States reported that they had created a vaccine that was 100 percent effective in protecting monkeys against the Ebola virus. The results were published in a respected journal, and health officials called them exciting. The researchers said tests in people might start within two years, and a product could potentially be ready for licensing by 2010 or 2011. It never happened. The vaccine sat on a shelf. Only now is it undergoing the most basic safety tests in humans with nearly 5,000 people dead from Ebola and an epidemic raging out of control in West Africa. Its development stalled in part because Ebola is rare, and until now, outbreaks had infected only a few hundred people at a time. But experts also acknowledge that the absence of follow up on such a promising candidate reflects a broader failure to produce medicines and vaccines for diseases that afflict poor countries. Most drug companies have resisted spending the enormous sums needed to develop products useful mostly to countries with little ability to pay. Now, as the growing epidemic devastates West Africa and is seen as a potential threat to other regions as well, governments and aid groups have begun to open their wallets. A flurry of research to test drugs and vaccines is underway, with studies starting for several candidates, including the vaccine produced nearly a decade ago. A federal official said in an interview on Thursday that two large studies involving thousands of patients were planned to begin soon in West Africa, and were expected to be described in detail on Friday by the World Health Organization. With no vaccines or proven drugs available, the stepped up efforts are a desperate measure to stop a disease that has defied traditional means of containing it. "There's never been a big market for Ebola vaccines," said Thomas W. Geisbert, an Ebola expert here at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston, and one of the developers of the vaccine that worked so well in monkeys. "So big pharma, who are they going to sell it to?" Dr. Geisbert added "It takes a crisis sometimes to get people talking. 'O.K. We've got to do something here.' " Dr. James E. Crowe Jr., the director of a vaccine research center at Vanderbilt University, said that academic researchers who developed a prototype drug or vaccine that worked in animals often encountered a "biotech valley of death" in which no drug company would help them cross the finish line. To that point, the research may have cost a few million dollars, but tests in humans and scaling up production can cost hundreds of millions, and bringing a new vaccine all the way to market typically costs 1 billion to 1.5 billion, Dr. Crowe said. "Who's going to pay for that?" he asked. "People invest in order to get money back." The Ebola vaccine on which Dr. Geisbert collaborated is made from another virus, V.S.V., for vesicular stomatitis virus, which causes a mouth disease in cattle but rarely infects people. It had been used successfully in making other vaccines. The researchers altered V.S.V. by removing one of its genes rendering the virus harmless and inserting a gene from Ebola. The transplanted gene forces V.S.V. to sprout Ebola proteins on its surface. The proteins cannot cause illness, but they provoke an immune response that in monkeys, considered a good surrogate for humans, fought off the disease. The vaccine was actually produced in Winnipeg, Manitoba, by the Public Health Agency of Canada. The Canadian government patented it, and 800 to 1,000 vials of the vaccine were produced. In 2010, it licensed the vaccine, known as VSV EBOV, to NewLink Genetics in Ames, Iowa. The Canadian government donated the existing vials to the World Health Organization, and safety tests of the vaccine in healthy volunteers have begun. NewLink's product is one of two leading vaccines being tested. The other, which uses a cold virus that infects chimpanzees, was developed by researchers at the National Institutes of Health and GlaxoSmithKline. The first tests of an earlier version of it, employing a different cold virus, began in 2003. Several other vaccine candidates, not as far along, are also in the pipeline and may be ready for safety testing next year. Once any drugs or treatments pass the safety tests, they will be available for use in larger numbers of people, and health officials are grappling with whether they should be tested for efficacy in the traditional way, in which some people at risk are given placebos instead of the active drug. Governments and the military became interested in making vaccines against Ebola and a related virus, Marburg, during the 1990s after a Soviet defector said the Russians had found a way to weaponize Marburg and load it into warheads. Concerns intensified in 2001 after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and anthrax mailings. "The National Institutes of Health came up with a program called Partnerships in Biodefense that partnered researchers like me with companies, usually small companies," Dr. Geisbert said. The government money led to major advances in the laboratory, Dr. Geisbert said, but was insufficient to cover the huge costs of human trials. Nor could the small companies that were involved in the early studies in animals afford to pay for human trials. No finished product came to market. Dr. Geisbert moved on, working on treatments for Ebola and another version of the V.S.V. vaccine. For the vaccine work, his main collaborator has been Dr. Heinz Feldmann, the chief of virology at the Rocky Mountain Laboratories in Hamilton, Mont., part of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. The newer version of the vaccine uses a slightly different form of V.S.V., one that Dr. Geisbert said he thought might be less likely to cause side effects, and more likely to gain quick approval because it has been used as the basis for an H.I.V. vaccine and is known to the Food and Drug Administration. But the new version, VesiculoVax, made by Profectus Biosciences in Baltimore, has not yet been tested in humans. The V.S.V. products are live vaccines, with replicating viruses that may cause a reaction. It is not clear what level of side effects will be considered acceptable. Chills and nausea are possible, Dr. Geisbert said, but he added, "Who cares, if you survive Ebola?" Most vaccines are given to prevent disease before people are exposed to it, and the plan is to use Ebola vaccines that way. But the V.S.V. vaccines have also been shown to protect monkeys even after the animals have been exposed to a heavy dose of Ebola if given soon after exposure. Researchers hope that they will work that way for people, too. If they do, health workers and family members who have been in contact with a patient might be protected, instead of having to spend 21 days of dread, waiting to see if they get sick. Dr. Geisbert spends much of his time working with Ebola and other deadly viruses in a Biosafety Level 4 laboratory at the Galveston National Laboratory, where the researchers wear spacesuits that each come with an independent air supply, and visiting journalists are required not to report which floor the labs are on. This month, one of his tasks is to test the Profectus vaccine and an experimental treatment against the Ebola strain that is causing the current epidemic. The virus is from a species called Ebola Zaire, against which the products have already been shown to work. But different strains within a species can vary genetically by 2 percent to 7 percent, Dr. Geisbert said. Most of the time, those small variations do not matter, and a drug or treatment that works against one strain will work against all. But once in a while, the difference matters. "We don't know for 100 percent certainty until we prove it in animals," Dr. Geisbert said. "The companies I work with are smart. They want that answer sooner rather than later, before they go investing millions of dollars to put this into humans."
The World Health Organization (WHO) announced that there would be around 200,000 Ebola vaccine doses available during the first half of next year. By the end of 2015, the number of doses could reach one million. The United Nations health agency added that the vaccines could be administered to health care workers stationed in West Africa as early as December. Even though a vaccine is in the works, the WHO cautioned that the vaccine does not guarantee an end for the outbreak that has been going on since March. "The vaccine is not the magic bullet. But when ready, they may be a good part of the effort to turn the tide of this epidemic," Dr. Marie Paule Kieny, a WHO assistant director general, said, according to the San Francisco Gate. Due to the severity of the Ebola epidemic, which is the largest one yet in the history of the disease, drug manufacturers have been working extremely fast to produce a viable vaccine. Vaccines typically take years to create and test. Currently, there are two experimental vaccines in safety trials and their results are expected to be available as early as December. If the vaccines prove to be safe ad effective, the trials would move the Ebola stricken West African nations, which are Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. These vaccines are manufactured by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and the Public Health Agency of Canada. "While we hope that the massive response, which has been put in place will have an impact on the epidemic, it is still prudent to prepare to have as much vaccine available as possible if they are proven effective. If the massive effort in response is not sufficient, then vaccine would be a very important tool," Dr. Kieny said according to BBC News. "And even if the epidemic would be already receding by the time we have vaccine available, the modeling seems to say vaccine may still have an impact on controlling the epidemic." There are also five other vaccines that start trials next year. The WHO added that mass vaccinations have not been planned before June 2015.
Millions of doses of experimental Ebola vaccines will be produced by the end of 2015, the World Health Organization has announced. It said "several hundred thousand" would be produced in the first half of the year. And vaccines could be offered to health workers on the frontline in West Africa as soon as December 2014. However, the WHO cautioned that vaccines would not be a "magic bullet" for ending the outbreak. There is no proven cure or vaccine for Ebola. In response to the largest epidemic of the disease in history, the WHO is accelerating the process of vaccine development It normally takes years to produce and test a vaccine, but drug manufacturers are now working on a scale of weeks. Two experimental vaccines, produced by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and the Public Health Agency of Canada, are already in safety trials. The GSK vaccine is being tested in Mali, the UK and the US. Research on the Canadian vaccine is also under way in the US with further trials expected to start in Europe and Africa soon. The results are expected in December. After that, trials will move to countries affected by Ebola, probably starting with Liberia. That will allow researchers to assess how effective the vaccine is and what dose is needed to provide protection. Healthcare workers, who place themselves at risk when treating patients, will take part in the first trials in West Africa. The WHO says we should have the first hints of how effective these experimental vaccines are by April. There are no plans for mass vaccination before June 2015 but the WHO has not ruled it out. The WHO says vaccines are likely to be key to ending the outbreak, even if cases fall in the next few months. Dr Marie Paule Kieny, a WHO assistant director general, said "While we hope that the massive response, which has been put in place will have an impact on the epidemic, it is still prudent to prepare to have as much vaccine available as possible if they are proven effective. "If the massive effort in response is not sufficient, then vaccine would be a very important tool. "And even if the epidemic would be already receding by the time we have vaccine available, the modelling seems to say vaccine may still have an impact on controlling the epidemic." The vaccine plan was the culmination of a day of talks at the WHO in Geneva. As well as the two vaccines already in trials, there are a further five in the pipeline which could yet play a role in the outbreak. The World Bank and the charity Medecins Sans Frontieres will help finance the vaccine. Dr Marta Tufet, from the Wellcome Trust and part of the talks in Geneva, told the BBC News website "I think we've made some majors steps forward, it's been a very significant meeting. "The key news is that money doesn't seem to be an issue, everyone's supporting this and it's a case of making sure we're prepared. "The standard method of public health control will win in the end, but a vaccine could have a very strong impact on the current epidemic." There are also suggestions that an "indemnity fund" could be set up in case people have a serious adverse reaction to a vaccine being rushed through. But until a vaccine is found to prevent the virus from spreading, treating and isolating sufferers will remain the key strategy for containing the outbreak. Jonathan Ball, a professor of virology at the University of Nottingham, commented "This is a big risk because we simply don't know if the vaccines will work. "But clearly, given the scale of problem in Africa, a problem that has arisen through international apathy, we are having to prepare for the worse." He added that it would be difficult to deliver the vaccine which needs to be stored at very low temperatures would be a major challenge in Africa. Dr Benjamin Neuman, from the University of Reading, told the BBC "I very much hope that the current outbreak will be over before the first vaccines ship, but even so, a vaccine will be important to long term plans to prevent an Ebola outbreak on this scale from ever happening again." He said there were many "similarly frightening and incurable viruses" across Europe and the Americas but they were contained by infrastructure. He said that for all the talk of vaccines "The closest thing to a magic bullet that stops all diseases is still a hospital." Ebola virus Busting the myths
Trials of a possible ebola vaccine could begin in west Africa in December with the vaccine more widely available in the first half of next year. Trials of a possible ebola vaccine could begin in west Africa in December with the vaccine more widely available in the first half of next year. World Health Organisation assistant director general Marie Paule Kieny said "Before the end of first half of 2015...we could have available a few hundred thousand doses. That could be 200,000 it could be less or could be more." She was speaking after WHO held talks about potential vaccines with health experts, officials from ebola affected nations and pharmaceutical firms. There is currently no proven vaccine against the deadly virus and drug companies have previously avoided investing too heavily in a cure because outbreaks before this year's had been small. West Africa's ebola outbreak began in March and has killed more than 4,900 people, most of them in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, according to the WHO. It believes that up to 1.4 million people could have been affected by 2015 and there are also fears the virus may be used as a weapon of bio terrorism. Two leading vaccine contenders are already in trials, with another five to begin trials next year. US firm Johnson Johnson have already said they aim to produce at least one million doses of their vaccine next year and UK based GlaxoSmithKiline is also working on a vaccine called ChAd3. GSK's chief executive Sir Andrew Witty said earlier that this week's meeting of health experts should discuss ways to make sure all drug companies worked together to get the vaccine out.
VACCINE Experimental vaccines will be made in their millions (PA) WORLD HEALTH authorities have claimed millions of doses of a vaccine for Ebola will be made by the end of 2015. The World Health Organisation (WHO) said the experimental vaccine will be produced in the hundred of thousands in the first six months of next year. WHO has faced criticism over its response to the crisis in West Africa which has seen the epidemic kill over 4,500 people, with most of the cases recorded in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The race is on to limit the spread of the virus, which has no proven cure or vaccine, and WHO have fast tracked their development for a vaccine. While Nigeria and Senegal have been declared Ebola free by WHO, the first reported case of it coming to Mali was confirmed by the government after a two year old girl tested positive when she arrived back from Guinea. WHO assistant director general Dr Marie Paule Kieny said "While we hope that the massive response, which has been put in place will have an impact on the epidemic, it is still prudent to prepare to have as much vaccine available as possible if they are proven effective. "If the massive effort in response is not sufficient, then vaccine would be a very important tool. "And even if the epidemic would be already receding by the time we have vaccine available, the modelling seems to say vaccine may still have an impact on controlling the epidemic." Meanwhile, the UK has secured a 800m European Ebola commitment following European Council meetings in Brussels that will see the EU take greater action to prevent the epidemic getting worse. Britain has spent a total of 200m so far on combating the virus. UK prime minister David Cameron said "Ebola is one of the worst public health emergencies we have faced in a generation. I have been absolutely determined that Britain, with other countries, will lead the way in dealing with this. "Not only should we feel a moral obligation as a wealthy country to help, but also because Ebola directly threatens both our national interests and people in the UK."
One million doses of an Ebola vaccine will be produced by the end of 2015, the BBC reported, citing the World Health Organization. It said "several hundred thousand" would be produced in the first half of the year. And vaccines could be offered to health workers on the frontline in West Africa as soon as December 2014. However, the WHO cautioned that vaccines would not be a "magic bullet" for ending the outbreak. There is no proven cure or vaccine for Ebola. In response to the largest epidemic of the disease in history, the WHO is accelerating the process of vaccine development It normally takes years to produce and test a vaccine, but drug manufacturers are now working on a scale of weeks.
HAVANA, Cuba, Oct 24 (acn) The first lot of an experimental vaccine against Ebola, produced in Canada, was sent to hospitals in Geneva to begin clinical tests on November 1, before being adopted by the World Health Organization. Canada s Health minister Rona Ambrose said that this was the first shipment out of three deliveries with 800 doses of the vaccine to fight the epidemic. She added that the vaccine must be preserved in dry ice at a minus 80 degrees temperature. The vaccine comes as a response to the call by the World Health Organization to fight Ebola in western Africa, while other countries like Cuba are also contributing to the international effort. Another important contribution has been made by France for the early diagnostic of the disease, which allows identifying an infected case in less than 15 minutes, she said. The Ebola epidemic has already claimed 4 thousand 555 lives out of 9 thousand 216 cases registered in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea, Nigeria, Senegal, Spain, and the United States, according to the latest report by the World Health Organization.
Tear gas and pepper spray hung in the air as police in riot gear descended on Keene, New Hampshire, on Saturday night, trying to disperse a rowdy crowd that brought chaos to the city's 24th annual Pumpkin Festival. Source CNN One million doses of an Ebola vaccine will be produced by the end of 2015, the BBC reported, citing the World Health Organization. It said "several hundred thousand" would be produced in the first half of the year. And vaccines could be offered to health workers on the frontline in West Africa as soon as December 2014. However, the WHO cautioned that vaccines would not be a "magic bullet" for ending the outbreak. There is no proven cure or vaccine for Ebola. In response to the largest epidemic of the disease in history, the WHO is accelerating the process of vaccine development It normally takes years to produce and test a vaccine, but drug manufacturers are now working on a scale of weeks.
Trials of a possible Ebola vaccine could begin in West Africa in December with the vaccine more widely available in the first half of next year. World Health Organisation (WHO) assistant director general Marie Paule Kieny said "Before the end of first half of 2015...we could have available a few hundred thousand doses. That could be 200,000 it could be less or could be more." She was speaking after WHO held talks about potential vaccines with health experts, officials from Ebola affected nations and pharmaceutical firms. There is currently no proven vaccine against the deadly virus and drug companies have previously avoided investing too heavily in a cure because outbreaks before this year's had been small. West Africa's Ebola outbreak began in March and has killed more than 4,900 people, most of them in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, according to the WHO. It believes that up to 1.4 million people could have been affected by 2015 and there are also fears the virus may be used as a weapon of bio terrorism. Two leading vaccine contenders are already in trials, with another five to begin trials next year. US firm Johnson Johnson have already said they aim to produce at least one million doses of their vaccine next year and UK based GlaxoSmithKiline is also working on a vaccine called ChAd3. GSK's chief executive Sir Andrew Witty said earlier that this week's meeting of health experts should discuss ways to make sure all drug companies worked together to get the vaccine out.
A vaccine was found to be 100 effective at protecting monkeys against Ebola, but pharma's business model kept it on the shelf. New York City officials have been working hard to prevent the public from panicking after a doctor living in Harlem was diagnosed with Ebola. "He did not have a stage of disease that creates a risk of contagiousness on the subway," Dr. Mary Bassett, the city health commissioner, said. "We consider it extremely unlikely, the probability being close to nil, that there will be any problem related to his taking the subway system." Which makes sense Ebola is transmitted through bodily fluids like blood, mucus, feces, and vomit. It is not spread through the air. But despite the extremely low risk of contracting Ebola in New York City, fear of the disease's high mortality rate still has some people wearing face masks on the subway. And as the death toll from the disease outbreak in West Africa nears 5,000, the obvious question is Why is there no vaccine? One answer, the New York Times reports today, is that there is an effective vaccine. Almost a decade ago, it was found to be 100 effective at protecting monkeys against the disease. But, despite researchers expecting the drug to be ready for licensing by 2010 or 2011, it never came to market. Bringing a new vaccine to market costs 1 billion to 1.5 billion. Ebola has the unprofitable qualities of being both relatively rare and infecting a mostly poor population. No pharma company wanted to foot the bill for human trials and production. The drug eventually made its way to the World Health Organization, which is currently testing it and another Ebola vaccine for safety in healthy volunteers. Other vaccines may be ready for testing next year. It's not just Ebola drugs that have the problem of being unappealing to the companies that could develop them treatments for malaria and tuberculosis can hit the same roadblocks. One way the government might incentivize drug companies to produce more treatments related to dangerous but unprofitable diseases like these, New Yorker writer James Surowiecki suggests, is for the government to award prize money to companies for developing new drugs in exchange for the company giving up the right to sell the product. "The drug company would get paid and would avoid all the expenses of trying to push a new product (which you don't want with a last resort antibiotic, anyway)," he writes. "Society would get a new drug, and public health officials would be able to control how it was promoted and used."
There is an Ebola vaccine that is 100 percent effective on monkeys. It has sat on a shelf, untested and unavailable to humans, for nearly a decade, while thousands of Africans died of the virus, because drug research is expensive and who's gonna pay Big Pharma for all that risk? Dying Africans? It's market economics, people. Denis Grady of the New York Times has the story about a possibly miraculous anti Ebola drug that's suddenly really hot among pharmaceutical companies, now that Westerners care about a deadly viral illness identified in a Congolese river region almost 40 years ago now. Based on V.S.V., a virus known to give cows a mouth disease but generally harmless in people, the vaccine developed by Canadian and U.S. researchers appears not only to inoculate monkeys against Ebola, but also to prevent the disease in animals who have already been heavily exposed to it. Developers expected that all the requisite tests could be run to get the vaccine to market "by 2010 or 2011." But testing just started a couple of minutes ago, because a decade's worth of monkeys may carry lots of viruses, but they don't carry gold cards or Aetna ... E xperts also acknowledge that the absence of follow up on such a promising candidate reflects a broader failure to produce medicines and vaccines for diseases that afflict poor countries. Most drug companies have resisted spending the enormous sums needed to develop products useful mostly to countries with little ability to pay... "There's never been a big market for Ebola vaccines," said Thomas W. Geisbert, an Ebola expert here at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston, and one of the developers of the vaccine that worked so well in monkeys. "So big pharma, who are they going to sell it to?" Dr. Geisbert added "It takes a crisis sometimes to get people talking. 'O.K. We've got to do something here.' " Dr. James E. Crowe Jr., the director of a vaccine research center at Vanderbilt University, said that academic researchers who developed a prototype drug or vaccine that worked in animals often encountered a "biotech valley of death" in which no drug company would help them cross the finish line. To that point, the research may have cost a few million dollars, but tests in humans and scaling up production can cost hundreds of millions, and bringing a new vaccine all the way to market typically costs 1 billion to 1.5 billion, Dr. Crowe said. "Who's going to pay for that?" he asked. "People invest in order to get money back." Don't forget The free market is the solution to any health crisis that happens to people with money !
Galveston, Texas Almost a decade ago, scientists from Canada and the US reported that they had created a vaccine that was 100 effective in protecting monkeys against the Ebola virus. The results were published in a respected journal, and health officials called them exciting. The researchers said tests in people might start within two years, and a product could potentially be ready for licensing by 2010 or 2011.
Millions of doses of an experimental Ebola vaccine will be produced by the end of 2015, the World Health Organisation has announced. It said "several hundred thousand" would be produced in the first half of the year. And vaccines could be offered to health workers on the frontline in West Africa as soon as December 2014. However, the WHO cautioned that vaccines would not be a "magic bullet" for ending the outbreak. There is no proven cure or vaccine for Ebola. In response to the largest epidemic of the disease in history, the WHO is accelerating the process of vaccine development It normally takes years to produce and test a vaccine, but drug manufacturers are now working on a scale of weeks. The government in Mali has confirmed the first case of Ebola in the country. A two year old girl tested positive for the virus after returned from neighbouring Guinea. Meanwhile a doctor in New York, who has also returned from Guinea, is in hospital with the virus. Dr Craig Spencer came down with a fever on Thursday, days after his return, officials say. CORRECT DOSE Two experimental vaccines, produced by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and the Public Health Agency of Canada, are already in safety trials. The GSK vaccine is being tested in Mali, the UK and the US. Research on the Canadian vaccine is also under way in the US with further trials expected to start in Europe and Africa soon. The results are expected in December. After that, trials will move to countries affected by Ebola, probably starting with Liberia. That will allow researchers to assess how effective the vaccine is and what dose is needed to provide protection. Healthcare workers, who place themselves at risk when treating patients, will take part in the first trials in West Africa. The WHO says we should have the first hints of how effective these experimental vaccines are by April. There are no plans for mass vaccination before June 2015 but the WHO has not ruled it out. The WHO says vaccines are likely to be key to ending the outbreak, even if cases fall in the next few months. Dr Marie Paule Kieny, a WHO assistant director general, said "While we hope that the massive response, which has been put in place will have an impact on the epidemic, it is still prudent to prepare to have as much vaccine available as possible if they are proven effective. "If the massive effort in response is not sufficient, then vaccine would be a very important tool. "And even if the epidemic would be already receding by the time we have vaccine available, the modelling seems to say vaccine may still have an impact on controlling the epidemic." The vaccine plan was the culmination of a day of talks at the WHO in Geneva. As well as the two vaccines already in trials, there are a further five in the pipeline which could yet play a role in the outbreak. The World Bank and the charity Medecins Sans Frontieres will help finance the vaccine. Dr Marie Paule Kieny, a WHO assistant director general, said "While we hope that the massive response, which has been put in place will have an impact on the epidemic, it is still prudent to prepare to have as much vaccine available as possible if they are proven effective. "If the massive effort in response is not sufficient, then vaccine would be a very important tool. "And even if the epidemic would be already receding by the time we have vaccine available, the modelling seems to say vaccine may still have an impact on controlling the epidemic." The vaccine plan was the culmination of a day of talks at the WHO in Geneva. As well as the two vaccines already in trials, there are a further five in the pipeline which could yet play a role in the outbreak. The World Bank and the charity Medecins Sans Frontieres will help finance the vaccine. "The key news is that money doesn't seem to be an issue, everyone's supporting this and it's a case of making sure we're prepared. "The standard method of public health control will win in the end, but a vaccine could have a very strong impact on the current epidemic." There are also suggestions that an "indemnity fund" could be set up in case people have a serious adverse reaction to a vaccine being rushed through. But until a vaccine is found to prevent the virus from spreading, treating and isolating sufferers will remain the key strategy for containing the outbreak. BIG RISK Jonathan Ball, a professor of virology at the University of Nottingham, commented "This is a big risk because we simply don't know if the vaccines will work. "But clearly, given the scale of problem in Africa, a problem that has arisen through international apathy, we are having to prepare for the worse." He added that it would be difficult to deliver the vaccine which needs to be stored at very low temperatures would be a major challenge in Africa. Dr Benjamin Neuman, from the University of Reading, told the BBC "I very much hope that the current outbreak will be over before the first vaccines ship, but even so, a vaccine will be important to long term plans to prevent an Ebola outbreak on this scale from ever happening again." He said there were many "similarly frightening and incurable viruses" across Europe and the Americas but they were contained by infrastructure. He said that for all the talk of vaccines "The closest thing to a magic bullet that stops all diseases is still a hospital."
Clinical trials for the vaccine at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in Maryland have now begun A vaccine found to be 100 effective in protecting monkeys from Ebola is to be rushed through human trials after sitting unused on a lab shelf for ten years. The vaccine, known as VSV EBOV, even had had its results published in a respected journal, and health officials called them exciting. However, it then languished on a lab shelf after being licensed to a drug firm until now. Studies already done in primates found that it prevents infection when given before exposure and increases survival chances when given after exposure. The intellectual property rights for the vaccine belong to the Government of Canada, and NewLink, a private company that owns the licensing rights to the vaccine, has the responsibility to produce mass quantities and to bring the vaccine to clinical trials. 'On October 13, 2014, the Government of Canada announced the start of clinical trials for the vaccine at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in the United States,' the Canadian Health Agency said. 'These trials will provide critical information about the safety of the vaccine and appropriate dosage. 'Results from the clinical trial are expected in December 2014.' NewLink Genetics says at least five clinical trials involving the vaccine, known as VSV EBOV, will soon be under way in the United States, Germany, Switzerland and in an unnamed African country which is not battling Ebola. The work stalled due to a lack on interest in Ebola, and because there were cases. 'There's never been a big market for Ebola vaccines,' Thomas W. Geisbert, an Ebola expert at the University of Texas and one of the developers of the vaccine, told the Boston Globe. 'So big pharma, who are they going to sell it to?' Geisbert said 'It takes a crisis sometimes to get people talking. 'OK. We've got to do something here.' The vaccine was produced in Winnipeg by the Public Health Agency of Canada, and is the product of more than 10 years of scientific research by Public Health Agency of Canada scientists at the National Microbiology Laboratory. The Canadian government patented it, and 800 to 1,000 vials of the vaccine were produced. In 2010, it licensed the vaccine, known as VSV EBOV, to NewLink Genetics, in Ames, Iowa. The Canadian government donated the existing vials to the World Health Organization, and safety tests of the vaccine in healthy volunteers have already begun. 'The Public Health Agency of Canada is supplying the vaccine to the WHO in its role as the international coordinating body for the Ebola outbreak, so that the vaccine can be made available as an international resource,' officials said. 'The WHO, in consultation with partners, including the health authorities from the affected countries, will guide and facilitate how the vaccine should be distributed and used. 'The remaining vials of the vaccine will be kept in Canada for further research and compassionate use as required.' The research is part of a rush of research to test drugs and vaccines is underway, with clinical trials starting for several candidates, including the vaccine produced nearly a decade ago.
GSK is working with the World Health Organization (WHO), regulators, and other partners to respond to the outbreak, to accelerate development of its investigational Ebola vaccine, and to ramp up production as quickly as possible. GSK acquired the Ebola vaccine candidate through the acquisition of a biotechnology company, Okairos, in May 2013 and has since been working with the National Institutes of Health to develop this vaccine candidate in response to the threat of Ebola. Phase I safety trials of the vaccine candidate are underway in the US, UK, and Mali, and further trials are due to start in the coming weeks. Initial data from the phase I trials are expected by the end of the year and if successful, the next phases of the clinical trial program will begin in early 2015, which will involve the vaccination of thousands of frontline healthcare workers in Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Liberia. "Beyond this, we are working with the WHO, regulators, and other stakeholders to determine how and when near term supplies of the Ebola vaccine could be made available for targeted vaccination of additional healthcare workers and other people at high risk of infection in the affected countries, where the impact would be most likely to limit the further spread of the epidemic," said GSK in a press release. The company noted that it is working to accelerate the development of manufacturing at an industrial scale so that if the trials are successful, the company will be in a position to significantly ramp up production of the vaccine candidate to help combat this, or future, Ebola outbreaks.
The World Health Organisation (WHO) says hundreds of thousands of doses of experimental Ebola vaccines will be ready for use by the middle of next year. The European Union has also announced an increase in funding to fight Ebola it will now contribute 1.25 billion. WHO Assistant Director General Marie Paule Kieny said millions of doses of experimental vaccines would be produced by the end of 2015. "The pharmaceutical companies developing these vaccines, as well as the ones which are a little bit longer in the development path, are committed to ramping up the production capacity to millions of doses, to be available in 2015, with hundreds of thousands to be ready in the first half of next year." Vaccines could be offered to health workers on the frontline in West Africa as soon as December 2014, the BBC reported. However, the WHO cautioned that vaccines would not be a "magic bullet" for ending the outbreak. There is no proven cure or vaccine for Ebola. In response to the largest epidemic of the disease in history, the WHO is accelerating the process of vaccine development. It normally takes years to produce and test a vaccine, but drug manufacturers are now working on a scale of weeks. Two experimental vaccines, produced by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and the Public Health Agency of Canada, are already in safety trials. The GSK vaccine is being tested in Mali, the UK and the US. Research on the Canadian vaccine is also under way in the US with further trials expected to start in Europe and Africa soon. The results are expected in December. After that, trials will move to countries affected by Ebola, probably starting with Liberia. That will allow researchers to assess how effective the vaccine is and what dose is needed to provide protection. The vaccine plan was the culmination of a day of talks at the WHO in Geneva. As well as the two vaccines already in trials, there are a further five in the pipeline which could yet play a role in the outbreak. The World Bank and the charity Medecins Sans Frontieres will help finance the vaccine. Meanwhile, in the US, one of the two American nurses who became infected with Ebola while treating a Liberian man in Texas has been declared free of the disease. Nina Pham has been released from the specialist hospital in Maryland where she was taken after the Dallas hospital at which she caught the disease failed to cope. Her colleague remained in isolation and the Liberian man they treated at a Dallas hospital died two weeks ago. Nina Pham spoke after her release from the specialist hospital in Maryland where she was taken. "I feel fortunate and blessed to be standing here today. I would first and foremost like to thank God, my family and friends. I am on my way back to recovery even as I reflect on how many others have not been so fortunate." New York Mayor Bill de Blasio held a news conference this morning to again assure people there is no cause for alarm over the city's first confirmed case of Ebola. Craig Spencer, a 33 year old doctor, had recently returned from working with Medecins sans Frontiers in Guinea. Health officials said Dr Spencer was in isolation and in a stable condition. Mr de Blasio said Dr Spencer took every effort to reduce contact with other people and sought help as soon as he had symptoms, so there was very little chance of him spreading the virus. Ebola has now killed almost 5000 people, mostly in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea.
In the wake of a meeting yesterday, the World Health Organization (WHO) announced today that a large efficacy trial of the two leading Ebola candidate vaccines may start in Liberia in December, a month earlier than the agency predicted just 3 days ago. "We're talking about now starting in December and not January," Marie Paule Kieny, PhD, told reporters at a press conference in Geneva. Citing an urgent vaccine development push by manufacturers, governments, and other partners, she added, "It shows how everything is pushed forward and the massive effort by everybody." Kieny, the WHO's assistant director general for health systems and innovation, also said hundreds of thousands of doses of Ebola vaccine may be available by June 2015, although that doesn't mean that mass vaccinations in West Africa could begin by that time. Her announcement followed a meeting yesterday involving officials from Ebola affected countries, governments sponsoring vaccine development, pharmaceutical companies, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). Small phase 1 trials of the two most advanced vaccines are already under way or about to start at several sites, with results expected in December, Kieny noted, echoing previous statements. The trials aim to assess the vaccines' safety and immunogenicity at different doses. "All is put in place by all partners to start efficacy trials in affected countries as early as December 2014," she said. She said the trials could involve 20,000 to 30,000 volunteers, some of whom would receive a control vaccine rather than an Ebola vaccine, an approach that's likely to be controversial. In a press release, the WHO said the efficacy trial protocols will be "adapted to take into consideration safety and immunogenicity results as they become available." One of the two leading candidate vaccines was developed by the US government in partnership with GSK, and the other was created by the Public Health Agency of Canada and has been licensed to NewLink Genetics Corp., Ames, Iowa. The US GSK vaccine, known as ChAd3 ZEBOV, uses a chimpanzee adenovirus with a Zaire Ebola virus gene spliced into it, while the Canadian vaccine uses a vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) to carry an Ebola gene and is called VSV ZEBOV. Close behind those two products in the development race, said Kieny, are at least five other experimental Ebola vaccines, which she expects will be in clinical trials in the early months of 2015. The companies developing the Ebola vaccines "are committing to ramping up the production capacity to millions of doses to be available in 2015, with hundreds of thousands ready in the first half of next year," she said. "To make this a reality, regulatory authorities in countries where the vaccines are made and in Africa will need to work closely with manufacturers on extremely short timelines to overcome a number of hurdles in the licensing and regulation of the vaccines." Kieny also said community engagement to promote acceptance of the vaccines will be a key part of the Ebola vaccine enterprise. "Work should be scaled up urgently in partnership between local communities, national governments, NGOs and international organizations," the WHO release put it. Although the timing is hard to predict, officials hope to have initial findings from the efficacy trials in hand around April of next year, said Kieny. She said the first efficacy trial is likely to be in Liberia, where plans call for a trial with three arms one for each of the two Ebola vaccines and one for a control vaccine. Planning is also under way for a trial in Sierra Leone, with either two or three arms, she added. However, she also indicated there's some doubt as to whether both of the leading vaccines will be ready to test in a large trial at the same time. She said that for the Canadian vaccine, much less is known about what an appropriate dose would be. There are no firm plans for a trial in Guinea at this point, Kieny said, commenting, "There seems to be less intense transmission in Guinea right now than in the other two countries, so we're more focused on those." She said it wouldn't accomplish much to duplicate in Guinea a trial that's being conducted elsewhere, but officials are discussing what questions an additional trial might address and how to go about doing it. Some medical experts and ethicists have argued against using a placebo control in the Ebola vaccine trials, saying it would be unethical to withhold a possibly protective vaccine from people who may be exposed to such a deadly disease. But Kieny said, "Most voices we hear are saying that for a vaccine trial, in view of the added speed that such a design requires in terms of demonstrating definite efficacy, this a placebo would be the preferred design." Those who don't receive an Ebola vaccine would get another vaccine (rather than a dummy injection), so they would have some benefit, and all the volunteers will be followed closely so they could receive early treatment if they get sick, she added. As for when mass vaccinations could begin in West Africa, Kieny indicated it's unlikely but not impossible that that could happen before June. If a vaccine proves effective, if the epidemic curve justifies mass vaccination, and if enough doses were available, it could happen, she said. She also commented that an effective vaccine might make an impact on the epidemic even if the kinds of responses now under way succeed in reversing the disease's spread before a vaccine is available in quantity. In other comments, Kieny said Meanwhile, a media report today said that Russia has started producing a trial batch of a vaccine to be tested against Ebola virus in Africa. The head of Yunona Pharmaceutical Holdings, Aleksandr Petrov, said the vaccine would be sent to Africa "in the next few days" for testing, according to the report from Bernama, Malyasia's national news agency. The story cited Russia's Itar Tass news agency as its source. Petrov said the vaccine, called Triazavirin, has been found to be effective against influenza, tick borne encephalitis, and other viruses.
The World Health Organization (WHO) set out plans on Friday for speeding up development and deployment of experimental Ebola vaccines, saying hundreds of thousands of doses should be ready for use in West Africa by the middle of 2015. The Geneva based United Nations health agency according to Reuters, confirmed that two leading vaccine candidates are in human clinical trials, and said another five experimental vaccines were also being developed and would begin clinical trials next year. "Before the end of the first half of 2015 ... we could have available a few hundred thousand doses. That could be 200,000, it could be less or could be more," the WHO's Marie Paule Kieny told reporters after a meeting in Geneva of industry executives, global health experts, drug regulators and funders. Researchers are testing two candidate vaccines from GlaxoSmithKline and NewLink Genetics. "At least 5 vaccines are following closely and will be in the clinic in the first months of 2015," Kieny said. Among those is a potential shot from Johnson Johnson, which is set to enter human trials in January. More Ebola cases The government in Mali has confirmed the first case of Ebola in the country. A two year old girl tested positive for the virus after returned from neighbouring Guinea. Meanwhile a doctor in New York, who has also returned from Guinea, is in hospital with the virus. Dr Craig Spencer came down with a fever on Thursday, days after his return, officials say. Correct dose Two experimental vaccines, produced by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and the Public Health Agency of Canada, are already in safety trials. The GSK vaccine is being tested in Mali, the UK and the US. Research on the Canadian vaccine is also under way in the US with further trials expected to start in Europe and Africa soon. The results are expected in December. After that, trials will move to countries affected by Ebola, probably starting with Liberia. That will allow researchers to assess how effective the vaccine is and what dose is needed to provide protection. Healthcare workers, who place themselves at risk when treating patients, will take part in the first trials in West Africa. The WHO says we should have the first hints of how effective these experimental vaccines are by April. There are no plans for mass vaccination before June 2015 but the WHO has not ruled it out. The WHO says vaccines are likely to be key to ending the outbreak, even if cases fall in the next few months. 'Prudent to prepare' Dr Marie Paule Kieny, a WHO assistant director general, said "While we hope that the massive response, which has been put in place will have an impact on the epidemic, it is still prudent to prepare to have as much vaccine available as possible if they are proven effective. "If the massive effort in response is not sufficient, then vaccine would be a very important tool. "And even if the epidemic would be already receding by the time we have vaccine available, the modelling seems to say vaccine may still have an impact on controlling the epidemic." The vaccine plan was the culmination of a day of talks at the WHO in Geneva. As well as the two vaccines already in trials, there are a further five in the pipeline which could yet play a role in the outbreak. The World Bank and the charity Medecins Sans Frontieres will help finance the vaccine. Dr Marta Tufet, from the Wellcome Trust and part of the talks in Geneva, told the BBC News website "I think we've made some majors steps forward, it's been a very significant meeting. "The key news is that money doesn't seem to be an issue, everyone's supporting this and it's a case of making sure we're prepared. "The standard method of public health control will win in the end, but a vaccine could have a very strong impact on the current epidemic." There are also suggestions that an "indemnity fund" could be set up in case people have a serious adverse reaction to a vaccine being rushed through. But until a vaccine is found to prevent the virus from spreading, treating and isolating sufferers will remain the key strategy for containing the outbreak. Big risk Jonathan Ball, a professor of virology at the University of Nottingham, commented "This is a big risk because we simply don't know if the vaccines will work. "But clearly, given the scale of problem in Africa, a problem that has arisen through international apathy, we are having to prepare for the worse." He added that it would be difficult to deliver the vaccine which needs to be stored at very low temperatures would be a major challenge in Africa. Dr Benjamin Neuman, from the University of Reading, told the BBC "I very much hope that the current outbreak will be over before the first vaccines ship, but even so, a vaccine will be important to long term plans to prevent an Ebola outbreak on this scale from ever happening again." He said there were many "similarly frightening and incurable viruses" across Europe and the Americas but they were contained by infrastructure. He said that for all the talk of vaccines "The closest thing to a magic bullet that stops all diseases is still a hospital." A New York doctor who recently returned from Ebola hit Guinea in West Africa has tested positive for the disease. Dr Craig Spencer, who treated Ebola patients while working for the charity Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), came down with a fever on Thursday, days after his return, officials say. He is the first Ebola case diagnosed in New York, and the fourth in the US. New York Mayor Bill de Blasio "There is no reason for alarm" EU leaders pledged at a summit on Friday to boost aid to combat Ebola in West Africa to 1bn euros ( 1.25bn 785m), EU president Herman Van Rompuy tweeted. Member states and the European Commission have already pledged nearly 600m euros. Dr Spencer, 33, left Guinea on 14 October, and returned to New York City on 17 October via Europe. On Tuesday he began to feel tired and developed a fever and diarrhoea on Thursday. He immediately contacted medical services and was taken to the city's Bellevue Hospital, where he is being kept in isolation. President Barack Obama said his thoughts and prayers were with the patient. New York officials said Dr Spencer had travelled on the subway and gone out jogging before he started feeling unwell. But at a news conference late on Thursday, they sought to ease fears of an outbreak in the densely populated city of 8.4 million people, saying officials had prepared for weeks for an Ebola case. They added that those who came into contact with Dr Spencer were not at risk. "There is no reason for New Yorkers to be alarmed," Mayor Bill de Blasio said.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has announced that millions of doses of an experimental Ebola vaccine will be produced by the end of 2015. According to WHO, "several hundred thousand" will be produced in the first half of the year. Even ahead of that 2015 schedule, it has been announced that vaccines could be offered to health workers on the frontline of the fight against Ebola in West Africa as soon as December 2014. The WHO is cautioning, however, that vaccines would not be a "magic bullet" for ending the outbreak, as there is no proven cure or vaccine for Ebola. In response to the largest epidemic of the disease in history, the WHO is accelerating the process of vaccine development It normally takes years to produce and test a vaccine, but drug manufacturers are now working on a scale of weeks. Two experimental vaccines, produced by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and the Public Health Agency of Canada, are already in safety trials. The GSK vaccine is being tested in Mali, the UK and the US. Research on the Canadian vaccine is also under way in the US with further trials expected to start in Europe and Africa soon. The results are expected in December. After that, trials will move to countries affected by Ebola, probably starting with Liberia. That will allow researchers to assess how effective the vaccine is and what dose is needed to provide protection.
Health officials have announced that the dose will not be a ''magic bullet'' for the disease, as a doctor becomes the fourth US citizen to get the condition Millions of experimental Ebola vaccine doses will be ready by the end of 2015, health officials have announced. And it was revealed a doctor has become the fourth person in the United States to get the killer virus. The World Health Organisation said vaccines could be offered to medics in West Africa as soon as December. Officials say "several hundred thousand" will be produced in the first half of next year, rising to millions in 14 months. But experts warned vaccines to counter Ebola, which has no proven cure, will not be a "magic bullet" for ending the outbreak, which has killed more than 4,800. Yesterday health officials in New York began tracing people who had been in contact with Dr Craig Spencer, who has tested positive for the disease. He returned from Guinea on October 17 where he was treating Ebola patients. The 33 year old came down with a fever on Thursday and was rushed to the city's Bellevue Hospital, where he is stable. Dr Spencer had travelled on the subway and had gone out jogging before he started feeling unwell. His fiancee and two friends have been placed into quarantine. Texas nurse Nina Pham, 26, who was infected with Ebola earlier this month, was yesterday declared free of the virus and was greeted at the White House in Washington by President Barack Obama. The WHO is accelerating vaccine development. It normally takes years to produce and test a vaccine, but drug firms are working to get one ready within weeks. Two experimental vaccines, by GlaxoSmithKline and the Public Health Agency of Canada, are in safety trials with results expected in December. European Union leaders agreed to boost their financial help towards fighting Ebola from 475million to 790million.
Within nine months of 2014, The agricultural sector recorded a 6.9 percent growth, services 6.8 percent growth, and trade 5.2 percent growth. Source Haykakan Zhamanak One million doses of an Ebola vaccine will be produced by the end of 2015, the BBC reported, citing the World Health Organization. It said "several hundred thousand" would be produced in the first half of the year. And vaccines could be offered to health workers on the frontline in West Africa as soon as December 2014. However, the WHO cautioned that vaccines would not be a "magic bullet" for ending the outbreak. There is no proven cure or vaccine for Ebola. In response to the largest epidemic of the disease in history, the WHO is accelerating the process of vaccine development It normally takes years to produce and test a vaccine, but drug manufacturers are now working on a scale of weeks.
There was a recent announcement by the World Health Organization saying that they are about the send a test vaccine in West Africa by December. They also said that they are able to produce a huge amount of the vaccine only if it shows to be effective. Their aim is to distribute the vaccine to every country that has Ebola patients. There have been developed 5 different types of Ebola vaccines in different countries. They are about to be tested by the end of this year, and the one that shows the best results will be produced and distributed to every country with Ebola epidemic. One of the vaccines was developed by GlaxoSmithKline a pharmaceutical company and another by the Canadian researchers. The other three vaccines were developed by scientists from US, UK, Switzerland and Germany. But they are still under development and they are about to be tested. The vaccine will be able to prevent the epidemic from spreading, but it won't be able to solve all the health problems that Ebola brings. But it will definitely help from other people getting infected. A developed vaccine in Canada, is scheduled to be tested in Geneva, Switzerland and the results are expected to come out in December. WHO is trying to connect pharmaceutical companies from all over the world to support each other with different equipments and finally produce the right Ebola vaccine. Everyone hopes for positive results from the vaccine, because lots of nations are now terrified by the Ebola epidemic.
The chief executive of the World Health Organization met with representatives of major drug manufacturers in Geneva Thursday to discuss efforts to develop a vaccine for the Ebola virus. The meeting took place as the number of confirmed victims of the outbreak in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea topped 10,000, with nearly 5,000 deaths. The disease has penetrated a sixth country in West Africa, with a single case reported in Mali. There have been isolated cases in Senegal and Nigeria, but health authorities in both countries claimed to have halted the outbreaks with only a handful of deaths. A fourth US Ebola victim was reported Thursday, when a doctor at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in New York City, who had been working as a volunteer in West Africa for Doctors Without Borders, came down with a high fever and was quarantined for treatment. According to press reports, the European Union has agreed to finance clinical trials of a vaccine, earmarking 31 million for research. The drug companies were focused on their bottom lines, insisting on limiting liability for any potential damage if a vaccine is rushed into production with less than normal testing. Andrew Witty, CEO of GlaxoSmithKline, told the BBC, "I think it is reasonable that there should be some level of indemnification because the vaccine is essentially being used in an emergency situation before we've all had the chance to confirm" that it is safe to use. Other top executives in attendance included Charles Link, the CEO of Iowa based NewLink Genetics, and Paul Stoffels, chief scientific officer and worldwide chairman of Johnson Johnson. Both companies have vaccines in development. The WHO said Tuesday that two vaccines would be tested in large scale studies in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, the three countries that are the focus of the epidemic, beginning in January. One was developed by the US National Institutes of Health and GlaxoSmithKline, the other by the Public Health Agency of Canada and NewLink. The process is slow compared to the speed of propagation of the disease, with preliminary results likely by the end of 2015. Three other vaccines will begin safety testing for possible side effects in the first quarter of 2015, using healthy volunteers outside the Ebola zone. These discussions are overshadowed by two US press reports that demonstrate the role of the drug companies in blocking any progress on stopping Ebola for the past 15 years because they saw no way to make a profit from a vaccine for a disease that killed only poor African villagers. The New York Times article was published October 24 under the headline, "Ebola Vaccine, Ready for Test, Sat on the Shelf." It reported that Canadian and US scientists several years ago developed a vaccine that was 100 percent effective in protecting monkeys from Ebola. "The researchers said tests in people might start within two years, and a product could potentially be ready for licensing by 2010 or 2011," the Times said. "It never happened. The vaccine sat on a shelf. Only now is it undergoing the most basic safety tests in humans with nearly 5,000 people dead from Ebola and an epidemic raging out of control in West Africa." The article noted that the development of the vaccine to the monkey trial stage cost only a modest amount, but comprehensive trials of effectiveness and safety in humans, plus the development of manufacturing techniques to produce sizeable quantities of vaccine, would cost up to 1.5 billion. "Most drug companies have resisted spending the enormous sums needed to develop products useful mostly to countries with little ability to pay," the Times continued. The vaccine in question was patented by the Canadian Public Health Agency and is now being developed for human use by NewLink Genetics. Five days before, on October 19, the Wall Street Journal published an equally devastating indictment of the pharmaceutical industry, profiling the work of Dr. Nancy J. Sullivan at NIH, who worked on the other most promising vaccine candidate, now being brought to market by GlaxoSmithKline. Sullivan began working on Ebola in 1997, after a 1995 outbreak in Zaire, and by late 1998 had developed a vaccine candidate that the Centers for Disease Control tested on monkeys, confirming 100 percent success by July 1999. According to the Journal account, "Unvaccinated monkeys became sick and died within about a week. The four vaccinated monkeys had no detectable virus something science had never before accomplished." The results were published in the prestigious journal Nature in 2000. But the pharmaceutical industry was not interested in developing an Ebola vaccine. The Journal account explains why "The recently retired chief of vaccines at Merck Co. said 'there's no market for this.' The Wall Street Journal wrote of 'the relatively tiny risk posed by Ebola.'" These accounts demonstrate that there is no Ebola vaccine today, even though the virus has been analyzed systematically for several decades and promising initial steps were taken in government research laboratories, because the private drug monopolies that control the development and manufacture of vaccines did not find it profitable. This underscores the fact that the 5,000 deaths from Ebola in West Africa were completely avoidable. The blood is on the hands of Merck, Pfizer, Glaxo and the other multinational companies which have a vampire like grip on the production of all forms of medication vital for public health care. The various governments that act as agents of the drug companies in the US, Britain, Germany and other imperialist countries are equally culpable. Meanwhile, the impact of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa is so dire that public health measures alone may prove insufficient to stamp it out. The WHO warned Tuesday that 19,000 doctors and nurses would be needed by December 1 in the region, compared to less than a thousand today, along with 500 burial teams, compared to only 50 now in operation. Dr. Anthony Fauci of the NIH warned that a vaccine may prove to be the only viable means of fighting the Ebola outbreak. Tragically, that would mean millions of deaths during the period that the long delayed vaccine is developed into a usable medication capable of mass production.
GALVESTON, Texas Almost a decade ago, scientists from Canada and the United States reported that they had created a vaccine that was 100 percent effective in protecting monkeys against the Ebola virus. The results were published in a respected journal, and health officials called them exciting. The researchers said tests in people might start within two years, and a product could potentially be ready for licensing by 2010 or 2011. It never happened. The vaccine sat on a shelf. Only now is it undergoing the most basic safety tests in humans with nearly 5,000 people dead from Ebola and an epidemic raging out of control in West Africa. Its development stalled in part because Ebola is rare, and until now outbreaks had infected only a few hundred people at a time. But experts also acknowledge that the lack of follow up on such a promising candidate reflects a broader failure to produce medicines and vaccines for diseases that afflict poor countries. Most drug companies have resisted spending the enormous sums needed to develop products useful mostly to countries with little ability to pay. Now, as the growing epidemic devastates West Africa and is seen as a potential threat to other regions as well, governments and aid groups have begun to open their wallets. A flurry of research to test drugs and vaccines is underway, with studies starting for several candidates, including the vaccine produced nearly a decade ago. A federal official said in an interview Thursday that two large studies involving thousands of patients were planned to begin soon in West Africa, and were expected to be described Friday by the World Health Organization. With no vaccines or proven drugs available, the stepped up efforts are a desperate measure to stop a disease that has defied traditional means of containing it. "There's never been a big market for Ebola vaccines," said Thomas W. Geisbert, an Ebola expert here at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston and one of the developers of the vaccine that worked in monkeys. "So big pharma, who are they going to sell it to?" The Ebola vaccine on which Geisbert collaborated is made from another virus, vesicular stomatitis virus, which causes a mouth disease in cattle but rarely infects people. The vaccine was produced in Winnipeg by the Public Health Agency of Canada. The Canadian government patented it, and 800 to 1,000 vials of the vaccine were produced. The Canadian government donated the existing vials to the World Health Organization, and safety tests of the vaccine in volunteers have begun.
NEW YORK (AP) A law enforcement official and a New York City official say a doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. The Detroit News identifies the man as Craig Spencer. The 33 year old emergency room doctor attended Wayne State's School of Medicine The officials received notification of preliminary test results and told The Associated Press but weren't authorized to discuss the case publicly before a Thursday night news conference. The doctor had been working in Guinea with the medical relief charity Doctors Without Borders. He returned more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk.
Ebola has been confirmed in a New York City patient. City officials say an emergency room doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the fourth case in the U.S. and the first in the nation's biggest city. Speaking at a press conference before 10 p.m., Mayor Bill de Blasio urged New Yorkers to remain calm and said the disease is different to contract. "We have had a full coordinated effort that has been working night and day," Governor Andrew Cuomo said. "We are as ready as we could be for this circumstance." Craig Spencer, a member of Doctors Without Borders, returned from Guinea more than a week ago, but came down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was rushed to Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan, a designated Ebola center, and was being treated in a specially built isoation ward. The CDC has dispatched an Ebola response team to New York, and the city's disease detectives have been tracing the doctor's contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. New York's acting health commissioner Dr. Howard Zucker told reporters, "it's important to reiterate that you can only get Ebola by being exposed to bodily fluids."
2 of 2 A health alert is displayed at the entrance to Bellevue Hospital Getty Images A doctor who recently returned to New York after treating ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus, city officials said last night. The medic, who had been working for Doctors Without Borders, is the fourth confirmed case in the US and the first in the nation's biggest city. Craig Spencer, a 33 year old emergency room doctor, returned from Guinea more than a week ago and reported coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was rushed to Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated ebola center, and was being treated in a specially built isolation ward.
NEW YORK (AP) A law enforcement official and a New York City official say a doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the first confirmed case in the city. The officials received notification of preliminary test results and told The Associated Press but weren't authorized to discuss the case publicly before a Thursday night news conference. The doctor had been working in Guinea with the medical relief charity Doctors Without Borders. He returned more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. (Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.)
Thursday evening, the Ebola virus made national news again. This time, a doctor being held at a New York City hospital tested positive for Ebola after working in West Africa. ABC News, through government sources, reports the doctor is Dr. Craig Allen Spencer. He is now in an isolation unit at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital. He had a fever and gastrointestinal symptoms when he was transferred to Bellevue, said NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene Commissioner Dr. Mary Bassett. New York Mayor Bill de Blasio tells the Associated Press there's no reason for residents to be alarmed by the Ebola diagnosis. Dr. Spencer had been working in Guinea with the medical relief charity Doctors Without Borders. He returned more than a week ago and Thursday reported coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. New York City's 'disease detectives' are tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk at contracting the deadly virus.
NEW YORK (AP) A Doctors Without Borders physician who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa was has tested positive for the virus. The doctor, who returned from Guinea more than a week ago and was monitoring his own health, was rushed by ambulance to Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center, after reporting he had a 103 degree fever and diarrhea, city officials said. "We can safely say that it is a very brief period of time that patient has had symptoms," the mayor said in a news conference. "Our understanding is that very few people were in direct contact with him." Ebola, which is spread through contact with an infected person's bodily fluids, has killed thousands of people in Africa. Only three people have been diagnosed in the U.S., and one has died a Liberian man in Dallas. The doctor acknowledged riding the subway and taking a cab to a Brooklyn bowling alley in the past week before he started showing symptoms, according to a senior city official who spoke to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to the discuss the details publicly. According to a rough timeline provided by the official, the doctor's symptoms developed Wednesday, prompting him to isolate himself in his Harlem apartment. When he felt worse Thursday, he and his fiance made a joint call to authorities to detail his symptoms and his travels. Emergency team in full Ebola gear arrived and took him to Bellevue in an ambulance surrounded by police squad cars. "As per the specific guidelines that Doctors Without Borders provides its staff on their return from Ebola assignments, the individual engaged in regular health monitoring and reported this development immediately," the international humanitarian organization said in a statement. As of Oct. 14, the organization said 16 staff members have been infected and nine have died. NewYork Presbyterian Columbia University Medical Center said the doctor was on its staff but had not been to work there since returning from Africa. "He is a committed and responsible physician who always puts his patients first," it said in a statement. "Our thoughts are with him, and we wish him all the best at this time." Follow us on Twitter JamaicaGleaner Follow us on Instagram jamaicagleaner Watch our videos on YouTube Jamaica Gleaner Email us onlinefeedback gleanerjm.com
1 CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE New York A Doctors Without Borders physician and Wayne State University graduate who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus, according to preliminary test results, city officials said Thursday. He's the fourth confirmed case in the U.S. and the first in the city. A further test by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention will confirm the initial test. A law enforcement official and a City official received notification of the preliminary test results and told the Associated Press on the condition of anonymity but weren't authorized to discuss the case publicly before a Thursday night news conference. Craig Spencer, a 33 year old emergency room doctor who attended Wayne State's School of Medicine, returned from Guinea more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was rushed to Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center, and was being treated in a specially built isolation ward. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has dispatched an Ebola response team to New York, and the city's disease detectives have been tracing the doctor's contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. City officials say the doctor acknowledged riding the subway and taking a cab to a Brooklyn bowling alley in the past week before he started showing symptoms. His Harlem apartment was cordoned off, and his fiance, who was not showing symptoms, was being watched in a quarantine ward at Bellevue. The Department of Health was on site across the street from the apartment building Thursday night, giving out information to area residents. Mayor Bill de Blasio said proper protocols were followed every step of the way and it didn't appear the doctor had been showing symptoms for very long. "The patient is in good shape and has gone into a great deal of detail with our personnel as to his actions the last few days so we have a lot to work with," de Blasio said earlier in the day. "We have a patient who has been very communicative and precise and who has only been back a very short time and has been quite clear about individuals he had close contact with." According to a rough timeline provided by city officials, the doctor's symptoms developed Wednesday, prompting him to isolate himself in his apartment. Ebola update Billionaire Paul Allen says he'll contribute at least 100 million to the fight against Ebola. The European Union on Thursday came up with another 2 31 million to fight Ebola, as the bloc's leaders pressed to create a 1.26 billion fund to fight the deadly virus. The Dallas hospital where a man diagnosed with Ebola died and two nurses were infected with the virus has seen patients flee the hospital, with a more than 50 percent decline in visits to its emergency room since the crisis began. 1 CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed. Read or Share this story http detne.ws 1tPtTVr
NEW YORK New York Mayor Bill de Blasio (dih BLAH' zee oh) says a doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the first case in the city. The mayor says there's no reason for residents to be alarmed by Thursday's Ebola diagnosis. The doctor had been working in Guinea with the medical relief charity Doctors Without Borders. He returned more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. Associated Press writers Frank Eltman, Cameron Young, Jake Person and Tom Hays and researcher Susan James contributed to this report.
NEW YORK (AP) New York Mayor Bill de Blasio (dih BLAH' zee oh) says a doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the first case in the city. The mayor says there's no reason for residents to be alarmed by Thursday's Ebola diagnosis. The doctor had been working in Guinea with the medical relief charity Doctors Without Borders. He returned more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
An emergency room doctor who recently returned to New York City after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the deadly virus becoming the fourth confirmed case in the U.S. and the first in the nation's largest city. Craig Spencer, 33, was rushed to Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital yesterday after he reported a high fever. He is being treated in a special isolation ward. Spencer returned from Guinea, where he was working with Doctors Without Border, more than a week ago. New York officials say he acknowledged riding the subway and taking a cab in the past week before he started showing symptoms. New York Mayor Bill de Blasio in a news conference last night tried to calm New Yorkers' fears. "We want to state at the outset that New Yorkers have no reason to be alarmed," de Blasio said. "New Yorkers who have not been exposed are not at all at risk." The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has sent an Ebola response team to New York and the doctor's contacts are being traced to identify anyone who may be at risk. His Harlem apartment was cordoned off and his fiancee, who has no symptoms, is in a quarantine ward at Bellevue. The news of the latest confirmed Ebola case in the U.S. came as Bay State health officials yesterday said protective equipment first responders and doctors will need to deal with a potential patient are in short supply. "There are now shortages. There may be people on preferred lists, but my understanding is today if someone wants to order this equipment they may have to wait a couple of weeks to receive it," said Kurt Schwartz, director of the Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency. To work around the shortage, Bay State hospitals are putting together small groups or "SWAT teams" to deal with potential Ebola patients, said Cheryl Bartlett, commissioner of the state Department of Public Health. "Some hospitals have a smaller core team, versus having thousands of employees that you have to make sure are adequately trained and able to put on and take off the gear," she said. And police and other first responders are looking at "regional capability" to handle an Ebola response instead of individual city or town departments, Schwartz said. "We don't need to train all 16,000 police officers and supply them," Schwartz said. "Every law enforcement agency is asking the same question How much do I need?" Herald wire services contributed to this report.
NEW YORK (AP) New York Mayor Bill de Blasio (dih BLAH' zee oh) says a doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the first case in the city. The mayor says there's no reason for residents to be alarmed by Thursday's Ebola diagnosis. The doctor had been working in Guinea with the medical relief charity Doctors Without Borders. He returned more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk.
NEW YORK, N.Y. A Doctors Without Borders physician who recently returned to New York after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus, according to preliminary test results. He's the fourth confirmed case in the U.S. and the first in the city. City officials say a further test by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention will confirm the initial test. A law enforcement official and a City official received notification of the preliminary test results and told The Associated Press on the condition of anonymity. Craig Spencer, a 33 year old emergency room doctor, returned from Guinea more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was rushed to Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola centre, and was being treated in a specially built isolation ward. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has dispatched an Ebola response team to New York, and the city's disease detectives have been tracing the doctor's contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. City officials say the doctor acknowledged riding the subway and taking a cab to a Brooklyn bowling alley in the past week before he started showing symptoms. His Harlem apartment was cordoned off, and his fiance, who was not showing symptoms, was being watched in a quarantine ward at Bellevue. The Department of Health was on site across the street from the apartment building Thursday night, giving out information to area residents. Mayor Bill de Blasio said proper protocols were followed every step of the way and it didn't appear the doctor had been showing symptoms for very long. "The patient is in good shape and has gone into a great deal of detail with our personnel as to his actions the last few days so we have a lot to work with," de Blasio said earlier in the day. "We have a patient who has been very communicative and precise and who has only been back a very short time and has been quite clear about individuals he had close contact with." According to a rough timeline provided by city officials, the doctor's symptoms developed Wednesday, prompting him to isolate himself in his apartment. When he felt worse Thursday, he and his fiance made a joint call to authorities to detail his symptoms and his travels. EMTs in full Ebola gear arrived and took him to Bellevue in an ambulance surrounded by police squad cars. "As per the specific guidelines that Doctors Without Borders provides its staff on their return from Ebola assignments, the individual engaged in regular health monitoring and reported this development immediately," the international humanitarian organization said in a statement. As of Oct. 14, the organization said 16 staff members have been infected and nine have died. The international ER doctor works at NewYork Presbyterian Columbia University Medical Center. He had not seen any patients or been to the hospital since his return, the hospital said in a statement. The doctor is a "dedicated humanitarian" who "went to an area of medical crisis to help a desperately underserved population. He is a committed and responsible physician who always puts his patients first," it said.
New York Mayor Bill de Blasio says a doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the first case in the city. The mayor says there's no reason for residents to be alarmed by Thursday's Ebola diagnosis. The doctor, identified as Craig Spencer, had been working in Guinea with the medical relief charity Doctors Without Borders. He returned more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk.
NEW YORK A Doctors Without Borders physician who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus, according to preliminary test results, city officials said Thursday. He's the fourth confirmed case in the U.S. and the first in the nation's biggest city. Craig Spencer, a 33 year old emergency room doctor, returned from Guinea more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was rushed to Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center, and was being treated in a specially built isolation ward. The CDC has dispatched an Ebola response team to New York, and the city's disease detectives have been tracing the doctor's contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. City officials say Spencer acknowledged riding the subway and taking a cab to a Brooklyn bowling alley in the past week. His Harlem apartment was cordoned off, and his fianceewas being watched in a quarantine ward at Bellevue.
You can find the most updated Hot Jobs every weekday morning at 5 30 on Good Morning Texoma and at 11 00 am on KTEN News Midday.More New york mayor Bill de Blasio says a doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in west Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the first case in the city. Authorities say Dr. Craig Spencer had been working in guinea with the medical relief charity "Doctors Without Borders." He returned more than a week ago and reported this morning coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue hospital a designated Ebola center. The mayor says there's no reason for residents to be alarmed by the diagnosis. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk.
New York New York Mayor Bill de Blasio says a doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the first case in the city. The mayor says there's no reason for residents to be alarmed by Thursday's Ebola diagnosis. The doctor had been working in Guinea with the medical relief charity Doctors Without Borders. He returned more than a week ago and reported on Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola centre. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk.
8.30 am New York officials Doctor has Ebola, 1st in city An emergency room doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus, Mayor Bill de Blasio said. It's the first case in the city and the fourth in the nation. he mayor said Thursday there's no reason for residents to be alarmed by the doctor's Ebola diagnosis. He said all city officials followed "clear and strong" protocols in their handling and treatment of Craig Spencer, a member of Doctors Without Borders.
NEW YORK New York Mayor Bill de Blasio says a doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the first case in the city. The mayor says there's no reason for residents to be alarmed by Thursday's Ebola diagnosis. The doctor had been working in Guinea with the medical relief charity Doctors Without Borders. He returned more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk.
NEW YORK (AP) An emergency room doctor who recently returned to New York after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the first case in the city and the fourth in the nation. Speaking at a late news conference, Mayor Bill de Blasio and Gov. Andrew Cuomo urged residents not to be alarmed by the doctor's Ebola diagnosis. De Blasio says "clear and strong" protocols have been followed in the handling and treatment of Craig Spencer, a member of Doctors Without Borders. Spencer, who had been working in Guinea, returned six days ago. He reported that he developed a 103 degree fever and diarrhea on Thursday. He was transported in a specially prepared ambulance to Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital. It's been designated an Ebola treatment center. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which will do a further test to confirm the initial results, has dispatched an Ebola response team to New York. Health officials say transmission is only possible with direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infected person.
New York City An emergency room doctor who recently returned to New York City after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus, Mayor Bill de Blasio said. It's the first case in the city and the fourth in the nation. The mayor said on Thursday there's no reason for residents to be alarmed by the doctor's Ebola diagnosis. He said all city officials followed "clear and strong" protocols in their handling and treatment of Craig Spencer, a member of Doctors Without Borders. "We want to state at the outset that New Yorkers have no reason to be alarmed," de Blasio said. "New Yorkers who have not been exposed are not at all at risk." "We are as ready as can be for Ebola case," he said. Spencer, 33, had been working in Guinea. He returned more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. While addressing a press conference on Thursday evening, the mayor acknowledged, "I know it's a frightening situation. New York is a dense place," but added, "The more facts you know the less frightening it is". "The health workers know they were prepared just for this moment. We feel good about the way we are handling the situation. We hope for the recovery of the doctor. We have the situation under control," he said. The mayor added that health officials were in touch with four people who had contact with Ebola patient. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which will do a further test to confirm the initial results, has dispatched an Ebola response team to New York, and the city's disease detectives have been tracing the doctor's contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. The city's health commissioner, Mary Bassett, said Spencer's fiancee and two friends had been quarantined. City officials say Spencer acknowledged riding the subway and taking a cab to a Brooklyn bowling alley in the past week before he started showing symptoms. His Harlem apartment was cordoned off, and his fiancee, who was not showing symptoms, was being watched in a quarantine ward at Bellevue. The Department of Health was on site across the street from the apartment building Thursday night, giving out information to area residents.
This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100 accurate. health officials said Doctor who recently returned to Newark City after treating Ebola patients in West Africa ... has tested positive for the virus ... in the first confirmed case in the city ... that patients thirty three old Frank Spencer was working with the medical relief charity doctors without borders in Guinea he returned more than a week ago and reported there is a ... coming down with a hundred and three fever and diarrhea ... he's being treated in an isolation ward in Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital just this week city officials said don't you would be prepared for in a bowl a case ... the hospital and designated Ebola center that doctors Harlem Apartment has been cordoned off ... the CDS disease detectives and increasing his contacts to identify anyone who may be addressed ... says and he kept the ... Associated Press
NEW YORK A new case of the Ebola virus has been confirmed in a patient who recently returned to the city following a stint with Doctors Without Borders. The tests confirmed the doctor was sick with the illness Thursday. He had recently returned from work in West Africa. The man went to Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital with 103 degree fever and diarrhea. Bellevue is a designated Ebola center. Thursday night, health officials cordoned off the doctor's apartment in Harlem. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. The 33 year old doctor is one of three people who are now being treated for Ebola in the United States. Five people have recovered and one person has died. Two healthy people in Louisiana are being monitored for any symptoms of Ebola after they returned from Africa. Health leaders in Louisiana said it is unlikely they are infected with the virus. There have been no cases of Ebola in Louisiana. Follow the publisher of this post on Twitter treyschmaltz
00 00 Health officials say a Doctor Who recently returned to New 00 02 York City after treating people look patients in West Africa has 00 06 tested positive for the virus. It's the first confirmed case in 00 10 the city. The patient 33 year old Craig Spencer was working 00 14 with the medical relief charity. Doctors Without Borders and Guinea he 00 18 returned more than a week ago and reported Thursday. Coming down 00 21 with a 103 fever and diarrhea. He's being treated in an 00 25 isolation ward and Manhattan's Bellevue hospital just this week city official 00 30 says don't view would be prepared for and a bullet case. 00 33 The hospital a designated people a center that doctors Harlem apartment 00 37 has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing 00 41 his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. Susie 00 45 and eat yes being Associated Press.
"We want to state at the outset that New Yorkers have no reason to be alarmed. New Yorkers who have not been exposed are not at all at risk." Mayor Bill de Blasio after a doctor who recently returned to the city from treating Ebola patients in West Africa tested positive for the virus. "Bad actions of a relatively few number of people were definitely compounded by inaction and the lack of really appropriate checks and balances." University of North Carolina Chancellor Carol Folt on the lack of institutional oversight at the school which allowed an academic fraud scandal to run unchecked for nearly two decades.
The city of New York is treating its first Ebola patient after a doctor who was working in Guinea tested positive for the disease. Craig Spencer, 33, who had been working with the charity Doctors Without Borders, returned more than a week ago and yesterday reported coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhoea. He is being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola centre. The medic's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off and the city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. New York's mayor Bill de Blasio urged residents not to be worried about the risk of infection. He said 'We want to state at the outset that New Yorkers have no reason to be alarmed. New Yorkers who have not been exposed are not at all at risk.' Mr De Blasio went on to say that Ebola is an 'extremely hard disease to contract', as it can only be transmitted through direct contact with an infected person's blood or bodily fluids. When Mr Spencer started feeling ill, his fianc e called authorities and explained his symptoms. Medical professionals in full Ebola protection suits could be seen arriving at his apartment and transporting him to the hospital.
New York officials confirm Ebola victim Dr Craig Spencer is being treated in an isolation ward in Manhattan and tells public not to be alarmed A US emergency room doctor who recently returned to New York city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus, becoming the first case in the city and the fourth in the nation. New York mayor Bill de Blasio and governor Andrew Cuomo on Thursday urged residents not to be alarmed by the doctor's Ebola diagnosis. Mr De Blasio said all city officials followed "clear and strong" protocols in their handling and treatment of Dr Craig Spencer, a member of Doctors Without Borders. "We want to state at the outset that New Yorkers have no reason to be alarmed," Mr de Blasio said. "New Yorkers who have not been exposed are not at all at risk." Dr Spencer, who had been working in Guinea, returned six days ago and reported Thursday morning coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which will do a further test to confirm the initial results, has dispatched an Ebola response team to New York, and the city's disease detectives have been tracing Spencer's contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. The city's health commissioner, Mary Bassett, said Spencer's fiancee and two friends had been quarantined but showed no symptoms. Related Articles New York doctor becomes fourth to be diagnosed with Ebola in US 24 Oct 2014 Mali sees first case of Ebola to become sixth West African country affected 23 Oct 2014 British American Ebola patient released from hospital 23 Oct 2014 Greening UK working around the clock to tackle Ebola 22 Oct 2014 How Nigeria beat Ebola 20 Oct 2014 GSK working at 'unprecedented rate' to find vaccine 20 Oct 2014
NEW YORK A Doctors Without Borders physician who recently returned to New York after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus, according to preliminary test results. He's the fourth confirmed case in the U.S. and the first in the city. City officials say a further test by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention will confirm the initial test. A law enforcement official and a City official received notification of the preliminary test results and told The Associated Press on the condition of anonymity. Craig Spencer, a 33 year old emergency room doctor, returned from Guinea more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was rushed to Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola centre, and was being treated in a specially built isolation ward.
NEW YORK (AP) An emergency room doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus, becoming the first case in the city and the fourth in the nation.Mayor Bill de Blasio and Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Thursday urged residents not to be alarmed by the doctor's Ebola diagnosis, even as they described him riding the subway, taking a cab and bowling. De Blasio said all city officials followed "clear and strong" protocols in their handling and treatment of him."We want to state at the outset that New Yorkers have no reason to be alarmed," de Blasio said. "New Yorkers who have not been exposed are not at all at risk."The doctor, Craig Spencer, a member of Doctors Without Borders who had been working in Guinea, returned six days ago and reported Thursday morning coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which will do a further test to confirm the initial results, has dispatched an Ebola response team to New York. President Barack Obama spoke to Cuomo and de Blasio Thursday night and offered the federal government's support. He asked them to stay in close touch with Ron Klain, his "Ebola czar," and public health officials in Washington.The city's disease detectives have been tracing Spencer's contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. The city's health commis...
NEW YORK (AP) A doctor who became New York City's first Ebola patient was praised for getting treatment immediately upon showing symptoms, and health officials stressed that the nation's most populous city need not fear his wide ranging travel in the days before his illness began. Mayor Bill de Blasio and Gov. Andrew Cuomo urged residents not to be alarmed by the doctor's diagnosis Thursday, even as they described him riding the subway, taking a cab and bowling since returning to New York from Guinea a week ago. De Blasio said all city officials followed "clear and strong" protocols in their handling and treatment of him. "We want to state at the outset that New Yorkers have no reason to be alarmed," de Blasio said. "New Yorkers who have not been exposed are not at all at risk." The doctor, Craig Spencer, a member of Doctors Without Borders, reported Thursday morning coming down with a 100.3 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. In appearance on CNN on this morning, the governor said Spencer "presented himself" to the hospital when he had "a 100 point 3 fever ... not 103 ... as has been reported."
NEW YORK A New York City doctor who recently returned from Guinea has tested positive for Ebola, the first case of the deadly virus in the city and the fourth diagnosed in the United States, according to the health department. Dr Spencer returned to the United States last week after treating Ebola patients in Guinea, where he worked for Doctors Without Borders. He was praised for getting treatment immediately upon showing symptoms, and health officials stressed that the country's most populous city need not fear his wide ranging travel in the days before his illness began. New York's Mayor Bill De Blasio and Governor Andrew Cuomo urged residents not to be alarmed by the doctor's diagnosis even as they described him riding the subway, taking a cab and bowling since returning to New York from Guinea a week ago. De Blasio said all city officials followed "clear and strong" protocols in their handling and treatment of him. "We want to state at the outset that New Yorkers have no reason to be alarmed," De Blasio said. "New Yorkers who have not been exposed are not at all at risk." The doctor reported on Thursday morning coming down with a 100.3 degree fever and diarrhoea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola centre.
(AP) NEW YORK (AP) A law enforcement official and a New York City official say a doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the first confirmed case in the city. The officials received notification of preliminary test results and told The Associated Press but weren't authorized to discuss the case publicly before a Thursday night news conference. The doctor had been working in Guinea with the medical relief charity Doctors Without Borders. He returned more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk. For more coverage on this, click here for ABC News. (Copyright 2014 by The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved.)
NEW YORK A doctor who recently returned to New York from treating Ebola patients in Guinea tested positive for the deadly virus on Thursday, the first confirmed case in the United States' largest city. The doctor, Craig Spencer, was placed in isolation at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital Center earlier Thursday after suffering Ebola symptoms, including a 103 degree Fahrenheit (39.4 Celsius) fever and nausea. New York Mayor Bill de Blasio confirmed Spencer's positive test at a late night press conference, but urged residents not to panic, insisting the city was fully prepared to stop the disease in its tracks.
An emergency room doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. He's quarantined in a hospital.
NEW YORK (AP) A law enforcement official and a New York City official say a doctor who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa has tested positive for the virus. It's the first confirmed case in the city. The officials received notification of preliminary test results and told The Associated Press but weren't authorized to discuss the case publicly before a Thursday night news conference. The doctor had been working in Guinea with the medical relief charity Doctors Without Borders. He returned more than a week ago and reported Thursday coming down with a 103 degree fever and diarrhea. He was being treated in an isolation ward at Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center. The doctor's Harlem apartment has been cordoned off. The city's disease detectives have been tracing his contacts to identify anyone who may be at risk.
A Doctors Without Borders physician who recently returned to the city after treating Ebola patients in West Africa tested positive Thursday for the virus, ABC News reports. The doctor, who returned from Guinea more than a week ago and was monitoring his own health, was rushed by ambulance to Manhattan's Bellevue Hospital, a designated Ebola center, after reporting he had a 103 degree fever and diarrhea, city officials said. "We can safely say that it is a very brief period of time that patient has had symptoms," New York Mayor Bill de Blasio said in a news conference before the test results returned. "Our understanding is that very few people were in direct contact with him." Ebola, which is spread through contact with an infected person's bodily fluids, has killed thousands of people in Africa. Only three people have been diagnosed in the U.S., and one has died a Liberian man in Dallas. De Blasio said the doctor was in good shape and has described in great detail where he was in the last few days and with whom he had contact. The doctor acknowledged riding the subway and taking a cab to a Brooklyn bowling alley in the past week before he started showing symptoms, according to a senior city official who spoke to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to the discuss the details publicly. According to a rough timeline provided by the official, the doctor's symptoms developed Wednesday, prompting him to isolate himself in his Harlem apartment. When he felt worse Thursday, he and his fiance made a joint call to authorities to detail his symptoms and his travels. EMTs in full Ebola gear arrived and took him to Bellevue in an ambulance surrounded by police squad cars. "As per the specific guidelines that Doctors Without Borders provides its staff on their return from Ebola assignments, the individual engaged in regular health monitoring and reported this development immediately," the international humanitarian organization said in a statement. As of Oct. 14, the organization said 16 staff members have been infected and nine have died. NewYork Presbyterian Columbia University Medical Center said the doctor was on its staff but had not been to work there since returning from Africa. "He is a committed and responsible physician who always puts his patients first," it said in a statement. "Our thoughts are with him, and we wish him all the best at this time." Health officials say the chances of the average New Yorker contracting Ebola are slim. Someone can't be infected just by being near someone who's sick with Ebola. Bellevue Hospital has been designated the city's main venue for handling Ebola cases. It has dozens of staff members at the ready and four isolation rooms that can quickly expand to 20 if needed. The Associated Press contributed to this report
In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend stepped out their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. She has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When Hickox returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine order. That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel is Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. (That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it furthermore, Ebola spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air.) "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 .
Not long ago, Kaci Hickox was fighting Ebola in West Africa, doing what she could to treat those with the deadly disease. Now, she's in the middle of a different fight this time, in Maine. Maine health commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that, even as it continues talks with Hickox's representatives, the state is in the process of filing a court order to require the nurse to abide by a 21 day quarantine. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," the state health commissioner said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Asked what she'd tell Hickox, Mayhew said, "We have been pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exists." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. (That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it furthermore, Ebola spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air.) "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. And, because of that, she has no intention of staying put. "I am completely healthy and symptom free," Hickox said Wednesday night from her front lawn, alongside her boyfriend. "I am frustrated by (the) intention ... to file legal action against me. "And if this does occur, then I will challenge those legal actions." Complete coverage on Ebola Nurse Won't let 'civil rights be violated when it's not science based' Earlier this month, Hickox served with Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone, one of the three countries hit hardest by the ongoing Ebola epidemic. She returned to the United States, at Liberty International Airport in Newark, New Jersey, on October 24 then was sent to University Hospital in the same northern New Jersey city and put under quarantine. On Monday, she was back home to her home in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 people on Maine's northern border. Hickox insists that, from her arrival through now, she has felt fine and that she's twice tested negative for Ebola. And since people can't spread the virus unless they are displaying symptoms, the nurse believes she doesn't pose a risk to anyone. One of her lawyers, Norm Siegel, told CNN any measure that restricts his client's movement is "based ... on fear and on myth, not on medical fact." "The government can't take away your liberty unless there's some compelling basis for it," Siegel said. "It doesn't exist here." While police officers stand outside to "monitor her" in case she leaves the house, according to Mayhew local health officials have been checking on Hickox regularly. Talks have been ongoing as well, with Hickox saying she is open to travel restrictions like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work. And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things," said Hickox. "But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, is "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intentions going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives" and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. New Jersey governor on lawsuit 'Get in line' The nurse told "Today" that she's in good health and does not have symptoms. A person must be symptomatic to be contagious if they have Ebola. But it can take up to three weeks between when a person contracts the virus and they become sick, hence the talk of a 21 day quarantine. Siegel told the Bangor Daily News that, while Hickox would contest any court order, she will abide by guidelines from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that say she should subject herself to monitoring, such as daily reporting of measured temperatures. "The conditions that the state of Maine is now requiring Kaci to comply with are unconstitutional and illegal and there is no justification for the state of Maine to infringe on her liberty," Siegel told the newspaper. Hickox initially was put in isolation Friday, after landing in Newark, New Jersey. New Jersey and New York had just started requiring anyone who had contact with Ebola patients in West Africa to be quarantined for 21 days. New Jersey officials additionally said that screeners determined that she had a fever at the airport. But Hickox, speaking to CNN over the weekend from her quarantine tent at the New Jersey hospital, said she never had a fever. "They were using a forehead scanner, and I was distressed and a little bit upset, and so my cheeks were flushed," she told CNN's Candy Crowley. The nurse said her temperature was later determined to be normal. Hickox told "Today" that she witnessed "complete disorganization" at the airport in Newark, New Jersey, and that New York and New Jersey's policies are "not scientifically" or "constitutionally just." The policies, she says, will be a "big deterrent" for health care workers who want to go to West Africa to treat patients, because they won't want to be quarantined when they return if, like her, they are asymptomatic. "It's already difficult for people to take time out of their lives to go and respond," she said, though she definitely plans to go back because it's a "privilege to help." New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie said his state agreed to let her go to Maine after confirming she "was no longer symptomatic," but he is unapologetic about New Jersey's quarantine policy. The straight talking Republican also hit back Tuesday at criticism that the nurse wasn't treated well enough, arguing that she even had Internet access and takeout food. "Whatever," he said, when pressed by reporters about a potential legal challenge. "Get in line. I've been sued lots of times before. Get in line. I'm happy to take it on." The debate about how to treat returning health care workers comes amid what officials say is the worst Ebola outbreak in history. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 .
(CNN) In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine order. That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. Complete Ebola coverage On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Connecticut girl barred from school amid Ebola fears family sues Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. Complete coverage of Ebola On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." Marco Rubio Quarantined nurse is a 'hero' He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . CNN's Jean Casarez, Greg Botelho and Jason Hanna contributed to this report.
Not long ago, Kaci Hickox was fighting Ebola in West Africa, doing what she could to treat those with the deadly disease. Now, she's in the middle of a different fight this time, in Maine. Maine health commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that, even as it continues talks with Hickox's representatives, the state is in the process of filing a court order to require the nurse to abide by a 21 day quarantine. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," the state health commissioner said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not standby and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Asked what she'd tell Hickox, Mayhew said, "We have been pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exists." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. (That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it furthermore, Ebola spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air.) "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. And, because of that, she has no intention of staying put. "I am completely healthy and symptom free," Hickox said Wednesday night from her front lawn, alongside her boyfriend. "I am frustrated by (the) intention ... to file legal action against me. "And if this does occur, then I will challenge those legal actions." Nurse Won't let 'civil rights be violated when it's not science based' Earlier this month, Hickox served with Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone, one of the three countries hit hardest by the ongoing Ebola epidemic. She returned to the United States, at Liberty International Airport in Newark, New Jersey, on October 24 then was sent to University Hospital in the same northern New Jersey city and put under quarantine. On Monday, she was back home to her home in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 people on Maine's northern border. Hickox insists that, from her arrival through now, she has felt fine and that she's twice tested negative for Ebola. And since people can't spread the virus unless they are displaying symptoms, the nurse believes she doesn't pose a risk to anyone. One of her lawyers, Norm Siegel, told CNN any measure that restricts his client's movement is "based ... on fear and on myth, not on medical fact." "The government can't take away your liberty unless there's some compelling basis for it," Siegel said. "It doesn't exist here." While police officers stand outside to "monitor her" in case she leaves the house, according to Mayhew local health officials have been checking on Hickox regularly. Talks have been ongoing as well, with Hickox saying she is open to travel restrictions like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work. And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things," said Hickox. "But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, is "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intentions going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives" and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. New Jersey governor on lawsuit 'Get in line' The nurse told "Today" that she's in good health and does not have symptoms. A person must be symptomatic to be contagious if they have Ebola. But it can take up to three weeks between when a person contracts the virus and they become sick, hence the talk of a 21 day quarantine.
(CNN) In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Maine nurse without symptoms won't submit to Ebola quarantine, lawyer says Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine order. That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 .
In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend stepped out their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. She has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When Hickox returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine order. That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel is Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. (That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it furthermore, Ebola spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air.) "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms.
Photos CNN In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine order. Apparently, she did Thursday. Is it fear or facts? That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . Recommended
Photos CNN In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend stepped out their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. She has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When Hickox returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine order. Apparently, she did Thursday. Is it fear or facts? That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel is Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. (That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it furthermore, Ebola spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air.) "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The president and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 percent to 70 percent. Recommended
(CNN) In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend stepped out their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. She has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When Hickox returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine order. That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. Complete Ebola coverage On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel is Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Connecticut girl barred from school amid Ebola fears family sues Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. (That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it furthermore, Ebola spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air.) "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. Complete coverage on Ebola On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." Marco Rubio Quarantined nurse is a 'hero' He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . CNN's Greg Botelho and Jason Hanna contributed to this report.
In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine order. That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side.
In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine order. That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 .
(CNN) Breaking news published 1 45 p.m. ET Negotiations between Maine and nurse Kaci Hickox concerning where she can go during a potential Ebola incubation period have failed, and Gov. Paul LePage will "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law," the governor's office said Thursday. In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine request. Apparently, she did Thursday. Hickox's attorney Norm Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be in out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." Looking for a resolution Is it fear or facts? That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Siegel said earlier Thursday on CNN. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine won't explain accusation On Wednesday, Maine Gov. Paul LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine CDC and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process to file a court order has already begun. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." Commissioner Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . CNN's Jean Casarez, Steve Kastenbaum and Greg Botelho contributed to this report. TM 2014 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.
FORT KENT, Maine (CNN) In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend stepped out their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. She has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When Hickox returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine order. That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel is Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. (That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it furthermore, Ebola spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air.) "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa
Nurse Kaci Hickox, 33, has become the face of a nationwide debate over treatment of healthcare workers returning from West Africa. (Credit Kaci Hickox via CNN) In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine order. That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. The health commissioner said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 .
Photos CNN In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine request. Apparently, she did Thursday. Looking for a resolution Is it fear or facts? That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said on CNN on Thursday, before his client left her home. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." In Maine, Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . Recommended
Photos CNN Negotiations over where a Maine nurse can be allowed to go have failed, Gov. Paul LePage said Thursday, and he's going to "exercise the full extent of his authority" to keep Kaci Hickox away from public places. The state is now saying it doesn't want to confine Hickox, who recently returned to the United States after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with the organization Doctors Without Borders. They want the nurse who has twice tested negative for Ebola and says she feels healthy to avoid public places such as stores for 21 days. That's the deadly virus' incubation period. Much of that period in her case is already up it is set to end the second week in November. Thursday morning, Hickox caused an uproar when she and her boyfriend, both staying at his home in Fort Kent, headed out for a bike ride. They returned in an hour, and were met by a throng of journalists watching her every move. The state has made it clear it's going to do something. But what? Thursday morning around 8 30 a.m. ET, before the bicycle sojourn, one of Hickox's attorneys, Norm Siegel, appeared on CNN. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," he said. He noted that Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they make any movement to arrest or detain her. Once that order is secured, her legal team would have three days to challenge it. He said he hoped a conversation between her legal team and Maine officials would produce a "reasonable" compromise. LePage later released a statement "As a result of the failed effort to reach an agreement, the governor will exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law." What could be next? State troopers have been parked outside Hickox's boyfriend's home. When the two went out for their bike ride, law enforcement vehicles followed them. There has been no moves to detain or arrest her. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine," Siegel said. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, Hickox had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, officials said. She was put into an isolation tent. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola, including an elevated temperature, to be isolated. Since returning to Maine, she has said in numerous interviews that she feels healthy. Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." Looking for a resolution On Wednesday, Gov. LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine CDC and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said Wednesday that the process to file a court order has already begun. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." Commissioner Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. Hickox contends the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, she emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, such as barring her from public transportation and limiting her to Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 on the Canadian border. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . Recommended
Photos CNN In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine request. Apparently, she did Thursday. Hickox's attorney Norm Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be in out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." Looking for a resolution Is it fear or facts? That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Siegel said earlier Thursday on CNN. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." In Maine, Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The president and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . Recommended
(CNN) In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine request. Apparently, she did Thursday. Hickox's attorney Norm Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be in out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." Looking for a resolution Is it fear or facts? That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Siegel said earlier Thursday on CNN. Complete Ebola coverage On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Connecticut girl barred from school amid Ebola fears family sues Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." In Maine, Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. Complete coverage of Ebola On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." Marco Rubio Quarantined nurse is a 'hero' He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . CNN's Jean Casarez, Steve Kastenbaum, Greg Botelho and Jason Hanna contributed to this report.
In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. (CNN) In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine request. Apparently, she did Thursday. Hickox's attorney Norm Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be in out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." Is it fear or facts? That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Siegel said earlier Thursday on CNN. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." In Maine, Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 .
FORT KENT, Maine In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine request. Apparently, she did Thursday. Hickox's attorney Norm Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be in out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." Looking for a resolution Is it fear or facts? That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Siegel said earlier Thursday on CNN. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." In Maine, Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 .
(CNN) Negotiations between Maine and nurse Kaci Hickox concerning where she can go during a potential Ebola incubation period have failed, and Gov. Paul LePage will "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law," the governor's office said Thursday. In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine request. Apparently, she did Thursday. Hickox's attorney Norm Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be in out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." Looking for a resolution Is it fear or facts? That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Siegel said earlier Thursday on CNN. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine won't explain accusation On Wednesday, Maine Gov. Paul LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine CDC and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process to file a court order has already begun. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." Commissioner Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70
Photos CNN Breaking news published 1 45 p.m. ET Negotiations between Maine and nurse Kaci Hickox concerning where she can go during a potential Ebola incubation period have failed, and Gov. Paul LePage will "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law," the governor's office said Thursday. Original news published 11 41 p.m. ET In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine request. Apparently, she did Thursday. Hickox's attorney Norm Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be in out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." Looking for a resolution Is it fear or facts? That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Siegel said earlier Thursday on CNN. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. CNN asked Siegel if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine won't explain accusation On Wednesday, Maine Gov. Paul LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine CDC and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process to file a court order has already begun. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." Commissioner Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . Recommended
AUGUSTA, Maine (AP) A group of Maine health professionals is criticizing the state's protocols for health care professionals who've treated Ebola patients. The group wrote in a letter Thursday that health officials have 40 years of experience with Ebola and should base health care decisions on established science. They say the science backs up nurse Kaci Hickox, who's fighting the state's attempt to impose a quarantine. And they also expressed fear that the treatment of Hickox could discourage other health care professionals from volunteering in West Africa. Two former state epidemiologists and two former state health directors are among those who signed onto the letter. They letter says "an epidemic of fear can be as dangerous as an epidemic with a virus."
FORT KENT, Maine In any other circumstance, it would be the furthest thing from a headline Maine nurse leaves home on bike. And yet Thursday, when Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend left their house in the tiny town of Fort Kent and pedaled along a long country road, law enforcement vehicles took off after her. About an hour later, they came back. A throng of journalists met her and photographed her. She went back into the house. Hickox has become the center of attention and debate about whether health care workers should be quarantined after they treat Ebola patients. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, officials said she had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, and she was put into isolation. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola an elevated temperature is one to be quarantined for 21 days, the virus's incubation period. Hickox has twice tested negative for Ebola, says she feels healthy, and upon returning to her home state of Maine has publicly said that she intended to defy that state's similar quarantine request. That question is at the heart of the standoff between her and Maine officials. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," Hickox's lawyer Norm Siegel said Thursday, before his client left her home. On Thursday morning, Hickox's attorneys plan to talk with state authorities to find a resolution, Siegel said. State troopers have been parked outside the home where Hickox has been staying in Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 near Maine's northern border. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine." Siegel said Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they can arrest his client if she breaks quarantine. Once that order is secured, her legal team has three days to challenge it. Siegel was asked if Hickox intends to go to work Thursday. "I would hope the government officials in Maine have a reasonable, open mind about what's going on and let's not have an exacerbation of the tensions that already exist," the attorney said. Maine's side Maine Health Commissioner Mary Mayhew said late Wednesday afternoon that the process has already begun to file a court order. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." In Maine, Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. That amount of time is significant because it may take that long between when a person gets Ebola and shows signs of it. Ebola, which spreads only via bodily fluids, not through the air, is contagious only when its carriers are showing symptoms, health officials say. "(This is) a reasonable request to ensure out of an abundance of caution that we are protecting the people of this state," Mayhew said. Yet Hickox says she thinks the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, Hickox emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, like barring her from public transportation and limiting her to the Fort Kent area. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 percent to 70 percent.
Photos CNN Negotiations over where a Maine nurse can be allowed to go to have failed, Gov. Paul LePage said Thursday, and he's going to "exercise the full extent of his authority" to keep Kaci Hickox away from public places. The state is now saying it doesn't want to confine Hickox, who recently returned to the United States after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with the organization Doctors Without Borders. They want the nurse who has twice tested negative for Ebola and says she feels healthy to avoid public places such as stores for 21 days. That's the deadly virus' incubation period. Much of that period in her case is already up it is set to end the second week in November. Thursday morning, Hickox caused an uproar when she and her boyfriend, both staying at his home in Fort Kent, headed out for a bike ride. They returned in an hour, and were met by a throng of journalists watching her every move. The state has made it clear it's going to do something. But what? Thursday morning around 8 30 a.m. ET, before the bicycle sojourn, one of Hickox's attorneys, Norm Siegel, appeared on CNN. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," he said. He noted that Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they make any movement to arrest or detain her. Once that order is secured, her legal team would have three days to challenge it. He said he hoped a conversation between her legal team and Maine officials would produce a "reasonable" compromise. LePage later released a statement "As a result of the failed effort to reach an agreement, the governor will exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law." What could be next? State troopers have been parked outside Hickox's boyfriend's home. When the two went out for their bike ride, law enforcement vehicles followed them. There has been no moves to detain or arrest her. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine," Siegel said. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, Hickox had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, officials said. She was put into an isolation tent. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola, including an elevated temperature, to be isolated. Since returning to Maine, she has said in numerous interviews that she feels healthy. Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." Looking for a resolution Maine says Hickox 'unwilling to follow the protocols' On Wednesday, Gov. LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine CDC and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said Wednesday that the process to file a court order has already begun. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." Commissioner Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. Hickox contends the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, she emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, such as barring her from public transportation and limiting her to Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 on the Canadian border. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . Recommended
(CNN) In the tense standoff between a Maine nurse and state officials, it was a surreal scene. Nurse Kaci Hickox, who recently returned to the United States after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, went on a bike ride with her boyfriend Thursday followed by a police cruiser and a throng of journalists watching their every move. Her lawyer called the ride "a good way to exercise her right." Hickox told reporters she "just wanted to enjoy this beautiful day." Hours later, Gov. Paul LePage said negotiations with Hickox over where she could go had failed, adding that he would "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law" to keep her away from public places. "I don't want her within three feet of anybody," LePage told CNN affiliate WCSH. "Right now, she can come out of the house if she wants, but we can't protect her when she does that. The reason there's a police car there when she does that is to protect her more than anybody. 'Cause the last thing I want is for her to get hurt," he said. "But at the same token, her behavior is really riling a lot of people up, and I can only do what I can do. And we're trying to protect her, but she's not acting as smart as she probably should." The state has made it clear it's going to do something. But what? "The first thing the governor has to do, which he has not yet done, is get a court order which requires her to stay in quarantine," CNN senior legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin said. "There is no court order now. She's not violating anything by taking a bike ride or leaving her house." There's no guarantee the governor will be able to get a court order, Toobin said, "because, according to the science, she is not in a communicable situation." It's unclear what the exact sticking point has been in negotiations between the state and the nurse. At first, Maine officials said they wanted Hickox to remain at home for 21 days the deadly virus' incubation period. Since then, they've said they want Hickox who has twice tested negative for Ebola and says she feels healthy to avoid public places such as stores during that time. She's about halfway there the incubation period, in her case, is set to end the second week in November. "I'm just asking her to be reasonable," LePage told WCSH. "Let's get to November 10, and then you can do whatever you would like." Attorney Nurse was making a point with bike ride Hickox has said it's state officials who aren't being reasonable. She contends the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. "I'm fighting for something much more than myself," she said Wednesday after emerging from the home where she had been staying. "There are so many aid workers coming back. It scares me to think how they're going to be treated and how they're going to feel." Hickox has said she's willing to compromise with the state, and that she's open to travel restrictions barring her from public transportation and limiting her to Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 on the Canadian border. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." One of her attorneys, Norm Siegel, told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." What could be next? When she returned from a month working with Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone last week, Hickox had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, officials said. She was put into an isolation tent. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola, including an elevated temperature, to be isolated. Since returning to Maine, she has said in numerous interviews that she feels healthy. State troopers have been parked outside Hickox's boyfriend's home. Siegel told CNN that Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they make any movement to arrest or detain her. Once that order is secured, her legal team would have three days to challenge it. He said he hoped a conversation between her legal team and Maine officials would produce a "reasonable" compromise. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law," Siegel said, "not in the streets of Maine." On Wednesday, Gov. LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine Center for Disease Control Prevention and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said Wednesday that the process to file a court order had already begun. CNN's Alexandra Field, Jean Casarez, Steve Kastenbaum and Greg Botelho contributed to this report. TM 2014 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.
(CNN) Negotiations over where a Maine nurse can be allowed to go have failed, Gov. Paul LePage said Thursday, and he's going to "exercise the full extent of his authority" to keep Kaci Hickox away from public places. The state is now saying it doesn't want to confine Hickox, who recently returned to the United States after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with the organization Doctors Without Borders. They want the nurse who has twice tested negative for Ebola and says she feels healthy to avoid public places such as stores for 21 days. That's the deadly virus' incubation period. Much of that period in her case is already up it is set to end the second week in November. Thursday morning, Hickox caused an uproar when she and her boyfriend, both staying at his home in Fort Kent, headed out for a bike ride. They returned in an hour, and were met by a throng of journalists watching her every move. The state has made it clear it's going to do something. But what? Thursday morning around 8 30 a.m. ET, before the bicycle sojourn, one of Hickox's attorneys, Norm Siegel, appeared on CNN. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," he said. He noted that Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they make any movement to arrest or detain her. Once that order is secured, her legal team would have three days to challenge it. He said he hoped a conversation between her legal team and Maine officials would produce a "reasonable" compromise. LePage later released a statement "As a result of the failed effort to reach an agreement, the governor will exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law." What could be next? State troopers have been parked outside Hickox's boyfriend's home. When the two went out for their bike ride, law enforcement vehicles followed them. There have been no moves to detain or arrest her. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine," Siegel said. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, Hickox had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, officials said. She was put into an isolation tent. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola, including an elevated temperature, to be isolated. Since returning to Maine, she has said in numerous interviews that she feels healthy. Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." Looking for a resolution On Wednesday, Gov. LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine CDC and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said Wednesday that the process to file a court order has already begun. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." Commissioner Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. Hickox contends the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, she emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, such as barring her from public transportation and limiting her to Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 on the Canadian border. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . CNN's Jean Casarez, Steve Kastenbaum and Greg Botelho contributed to this report. TM 2014 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.
(CNN) Negotiations over where a Maine nurse can be allowed to go have failed, Gov. Paul LePage said Thursday, and he's going to "exercise the full extent of his authority" to keep Kaci Hickox away from public places. The state is now saying it doesn't want to confine Hickox, who recently returned to the United States after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with the organization Doctors Without Borders. They want the nurse who has twice tested negative for Ebola and says she feels healthy to avoid public places such as stores for 21 days. That's the deadly virus' incubation period. Much of that period in her case is already up it is set to end the second week in November. Thursday morning, Hickox caused an uproar when she and her boyfriend, both staying at his home in Fort Kent, headed out for a bike ride. They returned in an hour, and were met by a throng of journalists watching her every move. The state has made it clear it's going to do something. But what? Thursday morning around 8 30 a.m. ET, before the bicycle sojourn, one of Hickox's attorneys, Norm Siegel, appeared on CNN. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," he said. He noted that Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they make any movement to arrest or detain her. Once that order is secured, her legal team would have three days to challenge it. He said he hoped a conversation between her legal team and Maine officials would produce a "reasonable" compromise. LePage later released a statement "As a result of the failed effort to reach an agreement, the governor will exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law." What could be next? State troopers have been parked outside Hickox's boyfriend's home. When the two went out for their bike ride, law enforcement vehicles followed them. There has been no moves to detain or arrest her. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine," Siegel said. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, Hickox had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, officials said. She was put into an isolation tent. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola, including an elevated temperature, to be isolated. Since returning to Maine, she has said in numerous interviews that she feels healthy. Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." On Wednesday, Gov. LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine CDC and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said Wednesday that the process to file a court order has already begun. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Connecticut girl barred from school amid Ebola fears family sues Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." Commissioner Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. Hickox contends the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. Complete coverage of Ebola On Wednesday night, she emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, such as barring her from public transportation and limiting her to Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 on the Canadian border. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." Marco Rubio Quarantined nurse is a 'hero' He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . CNN's Jean Casarez, Steve Kastenbaum and Greg Botelho contributed to this report.
(CNN) Negotiations over where a Maine nurse can be allowed to go have failed, Gov. Paul LePage said Thursday, and he's going to "exercise the full extent of his authority" to keep Kaci Hickox away from public places. The state is now saying it doesn't want to confine Hickox, who recently returned to the United States after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with the organization Doctors Without Borders. They want the nurse who has twice tested negative for Ebola and says she feels healthy to avoid public places such as stores for 21 days. That's the deadly virus' incubation period. Much of that period in her case is already up it is set to end the second week in November. Thursday morning, Hickox caused an uproar when she and her boyfriend, both staying at his home in Fort Kent, headed out for a bike ride. They returned in an hour, and were met by a throng of journalists watching her every move. The state has made it clear it's going to do something. But what? Thursday morning around 8 30 a.m. ET, before the bicycle sojourn, one of Hickox's attorneys, Norm Siegel, appeared on CNN. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," he said. He noted that Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they make any movement to arrest or detain her. Once that order is secured, her legal team would have three days to challenge it. He said he hoped a conversation between her legal team and Maine officials would produce a "reasonable" compromise. LePage later released a statement "As a result of the failed effort to reach an agreement, the governor will exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law." What could be next? State troopers have been parked outside Hickox's boyfriend's home. When the two went out for their bike ride, law enforcement vehicles followed them. There has been no moves to detain or arrest her. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine," Siegel said. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, Hickox had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, officials said. She was put into an isolation tent. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola, including an elevated temperature, to be isolated. Since returning to Maine, she has said in numerous interviews that she feels healthy. Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." Looking for a resolution On Wednesday, Gov. LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine CDC and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said Wednesday that the process to file a court order has already begun. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." Commissioner Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. Hickox contends the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday night, she emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, such as barring her from public transportation and limiting her to Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 on the Canadian border. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 .
(CNN) Negotiations over where a Maine nurse can be allowed to go have failed, Gov. Paul LePage said Thursday, and he's going to "exercise the full extent of his authority" to keep Kaci Hickox away from public places. The state is now saying it doesn't want to confine Hickox, who recently returned to the United States after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone with the organization Doctors Without Borders. They want the nurse who has twice tested negative for Ebola and says she feels healthy to avoid public places such as stores for 21 days. That's the deadly virus' incubation period. Much of that period in her case is already up it is set to end the second week in November. Thursday morning, Hickox caused an uproar when she and her boyfriend, both staying at his home in Fort Kent, headed out for a bike ride. They returned in an hour, and were met by a throng of journalists watching her every move. The state has made it clear it's going to do something. But what? Thursday morning around 8 30 a.m. ET, before the bicycle sojourn, one of Hickox's attorneys, Norm Siegel, appeared on CNN. "The worst thing would be is if she steps out of her house in the next hour and they try to put handcuffs on her," he said. He noted that Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they make any movement to arrest or detain her. Once that order is secured, her legal team would have three days to challenge it. He said he hoped a conversation between her legal team and Maine officials would produce a "reasonable" compromise. LePage later released a statement "As a result of the failed effort to reach an agreement, the governor will exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law." What could be next? State troopers have been parked outside Hickox's boyfriend's home. When the two went out for their bike ride, law enforcement vehicles followed them. There have been no moves to detain or arrest her. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law, not in the streets of Maine," Siegel said. When she returned from a month in Sierra Leone last week, Hickox had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, officials said. She was put into an isolation tent. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola, including an elevated temperature, to be isolated. Since returning to Maine, she has said in numerous interviews that she feels healthy. Siegel told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." On Wednesday, Gov. LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine CDC and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said Wednesday that the process to file a court order has already begun. Mayhew cited concerns about Hickox's hands on role in dealing with Ebola patients, as well as "concerns about the lack of reliability and the lack of trustworthiness in the information that has been received." "You need to be able to have trust and credibility in that information," she said. "That makes her a higher risk." Mayhew also blasted what she called "the lack of leadership at the federal level" that has created "a patchwork quilt of state by state determinations," vowing that "we will not stand by and exacerbate the situation in Maine." Connecticut girl barred from school amid Ebola fears family sues Mayhew said that officials have been "pleading for common sense, for an appreciation for the risks that exist." She pointed to other states such as New Jersey, New York and Illinois that have implemented 21 day quarantines for health care workers returning from West Africa, over objections from some medical professionals and federal officials. Hickox has been critical of those policies, too, saying that they could discourage health care workers from going to West Africa. It's possible that some would reconsider helping to fight the epidemic abroad because facing a quarantine upon returning home could hurt their ability to go to work and earning a living. She hastened to add that she planned to go back to West Africa and continue to help. On Thursday, the offices of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the creation of "a program of financial incentives" and "employment protections" to encourage health care workers to treat Ebola patients in West Africa. Among the measures The state will "provide necessary reimbursements to health care workers and their employers for any quarantines that are needed upon their return to help protect public health and safety in New York." Commissioner Mayhew said she "did not understand" why Hickox is challenging what she calls a "common sense approach" of the nurse staying home for three weeks. Hickox contends the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. Complete coverage of Ebola On Wednesday night, she emerged from the home where she has been staying. She reiterated that she is healthy and free of any Ebola symptoms. She said she is willing to compromise with the state. Hickox is open to travel restrictions, such as barring her from public transportation and limiting her to Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 on the Canadian border. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." Having to defend herself and not being able to hug her friends, especially after four tough weeks in West Africa, are "painful (and) emotionally draining," the nurse said. Hickox also said "it's frustrating to hear nasty things," saying her intention in going to Sierra Leone was to make "a difference in people's lives," and her aim now that she's back is not "to put anyone at risk in this community." Obama champions Ebola caregivers While he didn't mention Hickox's case specifically, President Barack Obama on Wednesday did speak to and in support of health care workers like her who have risked their lives and livelihoods by going to West Africa to help those in need. He characterized them as "heroes" who "deserve to be treated with dignity and respect." Marco Rubio Quarantined nurse is a 'hero' He also criticized those championing policies such as quarantines and travel bans, saying that America should firstly be praising, encouraging and supporting health care workers critical to curbing the Ebola epidemic rather than antagonizing them. "When I hear people talking about American leadership and then are promoting policies that would avoid leadership and have us running in the opposite direction and hiding under the covers, it makes me a little frustrated," Obama said. The President and numerous infectious disease experts have stressed the importance of stopping Ebola at its source to combat the further spread of the virus to the rest of the world. The World Health Organization reported Wednesday that there are more than 13,700 confirmed or suspected cases of Ebola, almost all in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The United Nations' health authority projected about 5,000 deaths from the virus. And those are only the ones that authorities have been able to count. In a region where health care access and record keeping are limited, the WHO says the death toll may be especially undercounted. Some ill people who are seen by physicians and counted as Ebola cases may not stay for treatment and die of the disease, and the record keepers won't know to record their deaths. The WHO has said that the mortality rate from the current outbreak, starting with the first death in December, is roughly 60 to 70 . CNN's Jean Casarez, Steve Kastenbaum and Greg Botelho contributed to this report.
Photos CNN In the tense standoff between a Maine nurse and state officials, it was a surreal scene. Nurse Kaci Hickox, who recently returned to the United States after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, went on a bike ride with her boyfriend Thursday followed by a police cruiser and a throng of journalists watching their every move. Her lawyer called the ride "a good way to exercise her right." Hickox told reporters she "just wanted to enjoy this beautiful day." Hours later, Gov. Paul LePage said negotiations with Hickox over where she could go had failed, adding that he would "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law" to keep her away from public places. "I don't want her within three feet of anybody," LePage told CNN affiliate WCSH. "Right now she can come out of the house if she wants, but we can't protect her when she does that. The reason there's a police car there when she does that is to protect her more than anybody. 'Cause the last thing I want is for her to get hurt," he said. "But at the same token, her behavior is really riling a lot of people up, and I can only do what I can do. And we're trying to protect her, but she's not acting as smart as she probably should." The state has made it clear it's going to do something. But what? "The first thing the governor has to do, which he has not yet done, is get a court order which requires her to stay in quarantine," CNN senior legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin said. "There is no court order now. She's not violating anything by taking a bike ride or leaving her house." There's no guarantee the governor will be able to get a court order, Toobin said, "because, according to the science, she is not in a communicable situation." State officials have previously said they want the nurse who has twice tested negative for Ebola and says she feels healthy to avoid public places such as stores for 21 days. That's the deadly virus' incubation period. She's about halfway there that period, in her case, is set to end the second week in November. "I'm just asking her to be reasonable," LePage told WCSH. "Let's get to November 10, and then you can do whatever you would like." Attorney Nurse was making a point with bike ride Hickox has said it's state officials who aren't being reasonable. She contends the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. On Wednesday, she emerged from the home where she has been staying and said she was willing to compromise with the state. She said she was open to travel restrictions, such as barring her from public transportation and limiting her to Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 on the Canadian border. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." One of her attorneys, Norm Siegel, told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." What could be next? When she returned from a month working with Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone last week, Hickox had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, officials said. She was put into an isolation tent. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola, including an elevated temperature, to be isolated. Since returning to Maine, she has said in numerous interviews that she feels healthy. State troopers have been parked outside Hickox's boyfriend's home. Siegel told CNN that Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they make any movement to arrest or detain her. Once that order is secured, her legal team would have three days to challenge it. He said he hoped a conversation between her legal team and Maine officials would produce a "reasonable" compromise. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law," Siegel said, "not in the streets of Maine." On Wednesday, Gov. LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine Center for Disease Control Prevention and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said Wednesday that the process to file a court order had already begun. Recommended
Photos CNN In the tense standoff between a Maine nurse and state officials, it was a surreal scene. Nurse Kaci Hickox, who recently returned to the United States after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, went on a bike ride with her boyfriend Thursday followed by a police cruiser and a throng of journalists watching their every move. Her lawyer called the ride "a good way to exercise her right." Hickox told reporters she "just wanted to enjoy this beautiful day." Hours later, Gov. Paul LePage said negotiations with Hickox over where she could go had failed, adding that he would "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law" to keep her away from public places. "I don't want her within three feet of anybody," LePage told CNN affiliate WCSH. "Right now, she can come out of the house if she wants, but we can't protect her when she does that. The reason there's a police car there when she does that is to protect her more than anybody. 'Cause the last thing I want is for her to get hurt," he said. "But at the same token, her behavior is really riling a lot of people up, and I can only do what I can do. And we're trying to protect her, but she's not acting as smart as she probably should." The state has made it clear it's going to do something. But what? "The first thing the governor has to do, which he has not yet done, is get a court order which requires her to stay in quarantine," CNN senior legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin said. "There is no court order now. She's not violating anything by taking a bike ride or leaving her house." There's no guarantee the governor will be able to get a court order, Toobin said, "because, according to the science, she is not in a communicable situation." It's unclear what the exact sticking point has been in negotiations between the state and the nurse. At first, Maine officials said they wanted Hickox to remain at home for 21 days the deadly virus' incubation period. Since then, they've said they want Hickox who has twice tested negative for Ebola and says she feels healthy to avoid public places such as stores during that time. She's about halfway there the incubation period, in her case, is set to end the second week in November. "I'm just asking her to be reasonable," LePage told WCSH. "Let's get to November 10, and then you can do whatever you would like." Attorney Nurse was making a point with bike ride Hickox has said it's state officials who aren't being reasonable. She contends the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. "I'm fighting for something much more than myself," she said Wednesday after emerging from the home where she had been staying. "There are so many aid workers coming back. It scares me to think how they're going to be treated and how they're going to feel." Hickox has said she's willing to compromise with the state, and that she's open to travel restrictions barring her from public transportation and limiting her to Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 on the Canadian border. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." One of her attorneys, Norm Siegel, told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." What could be next? When she returned from a month working with Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone last week, Hickox had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, officials said. She was put into an isolation tent. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola, including an elevated temperature, to be isolated. Since returning to Maine, she has said in numerous interviews that she feels healthy. State troopers have been parked outside Hickox's boyfriend's home. Siegel told CNN that Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they make any movement to arrest or detain her. Once that order is secured, her legal team would have three days to challenge it. He said he hoped a conversation between her legal team and Maine officials would produce a "reasonable" compromise. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law," Siegel said, "not in the streets of Maine." On Wednesday, Gov. LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine Center for Disease Control Prevention and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said Wednesday that the process to file a court order had already begun. Recommended
(CNN) In the tense standoff between a Maine nurse and state officials, it was a surreal scene. Nurse Kaci Hickox, who recently returned to the United States after treating Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, went on a bike ride with her boyfriend Thursday followed by a police cruiser and a throng of journalists watching their every move. Her lawyer called the ride "a good way to exercise her right." Hickox told reporters she "just wanted to enjoy this beautiful day." Hours later, Gov. Paul LePage said negotiations with Hickox over where she could go had failed, adding that he would "exercise the full extent of his authority allowable by law" to keep her away from public places. "I don't want her within three feet of anybody," LePage told CNN affiliate WCSH. "Right now, she can come out of the house if she wants, but we can't protect her when she does that. The reason there's a police car there when she does that is to protect her more than anybody. 'Cause the last thing I want is for her to get hurt," he said. "But at the same token, her behavior is really riling a lot of people up, and I can only do what I can do. And we're trying to protect her, but she's not acting as smart as she probably should." The state has made it clear it's going to do something. But what? "The first thing the governor has to do, which he has not yet done, is get a court order which requires her to stay in quarantine," CNN senior legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin said. "There is no court order now. She's not violating anything by taking a bike ride or leaving her house." There's no guarantee the governor will be able to get a court order, Toobin said, "because, according to the science, she is not in a communicable situation." It's unclear what the exact sticking point has been in negotiations between the state and the nurse. At first, Maine officials said they wanted Hickox to remain at home for 21 days the deadly virus' incubation period. Since then, they've said they want Hickox who has twice tested negative for Ebola and says she feels healthy to avoid public places such as stores during that time. She's about halfway there the incubation period, in her case, is set to end the second week in November. "I'm just asking her to be reasonable," LePage told WCSH. "Let's get to November 10, and then you can do whatever you would like." Attorney Nurse was making a point with bike ride Hickox has said it's state officials who aren't being reasonable. She contends the U.S. Constitution and science are on her side. "I'm fighting for something much more than myself," she said Wednesday after emerging from the home where she had been staying. "There are so many aid workers coming back. It scares me to think how they're going to be treated and how they're going to feel." Hickox has said she's willing to compromise with the state, and that she's open to travel restrictions barring her from public transportation and limiting her to Fort Kent, a town of 4,000 on the Canadian border. "So I think there are things that, I know, work," she said. "And I know all aid workers are willing to do those things. But I'm not willing to stand here and let my civil rights be violated when it's not science based." One of her attorneys, Norm Siegel, told CNN that the couple went for the bike ride to make a point She could be out in public "without freaking everyone out." "You can take a bike ride, be in the public and not actually interact with people," Siegel said. "We thought this was a good way to exercise her right. We didn't want anyone in the town to be scared, even though the fear is based in misinformation." What could be next? When she returned from a month working with Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone last week, Hickox had a temperature at an airport in Newark, New Jersey, officials said. She was put into an isolation tent. She blasted New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for enforcing a new policy that required anyone who was showing symptoms of Ebola, including an elevated temperature, to be isolated. Since returning to Maine, she has said in numerous interviews that she feels healthy. State troopers have been parked outside Hickox's boyfriend's home. Siegel told CNN that Maine authorities must obtain a court order before they make any movement to arrest or detain her. Once that order is secured, her legal team would have three days to challenge it. He said he hoped a conversation between her legal team and Maine officials would produce a "reasonable" compromise. "If we're going to have a disagreement, let's have the disagreement in a court of law," Siegel said, "not in the streets of Maine." On Wednesday, Gov. LePage said that Hickox "has been unwilling to follow the protocols set forth by the Maine Center for Disease Control Prevention and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for medical workers who have been in contact with Ebola patients." The statement didn't say which protocols she was resisting but added that LePage is seeking legal authority to enforce a quarantine. Maine Health and Human Services Commissioner Mary Mayhew said Wednesday that the process to file a court order had already begun.
Bishkek (AKIpress) A Spanish nursing auxiliary who treated a man infected with the Ebola virus in Madrid has tested positive for the virus herself, confirmed Spanish Health Authorities on Monday, reports Xinhua. The nurse, who is receiving treatment in the Alcorcon Hospital just outside of the Spanish capital, was part of the team who treated Spanish missionary Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died on September 25 in the Carlos III hospital in the north of Madrid. The nurse was admitted to the Alcorcon hospital on Monday morning with possible symptoms of Ebola (fever), which she had experienced since September 30. It was also confirmed at the conference that the patient had been in contact with Viejo on two occasions at Carlos III and had been on holiday since his death. She was put into isolation and submitted to the appropriate tests which confirm her infection with the virus. According to the relevant protocols all of those involved in looking after the two Ebola patients who have been treated in Spain have to take their temperature twice a day for a period of 21 days. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato gave a press conference on Monday evening in which she said Spaniards "can be certain that we are taking measures to ensure the best treatment for the person infected, as well as the safety of those looking after her and all Spanish citizens." "We will put all measures at the Health Authorities' to deal with this problem," said Mato, who added she wanted to "send a message of calm to all citizens of this country, we have magnificent professionals to deal with this illness." Meanwhile health service unions, who had warned that Carlos III was unsuitable for the treatment of patients with a disease such as Ebola, have asked for the resignation of Rafael Perez Santamaria, the Director of the La Paz Carlos III hospital.
Here's a roundup of the latest developments on Ebola. We'll update this post as news happens. In Spain, Teresa Romero Ramos, the nurse who was admitted to a hospital in Madrid after caring for an infected priest who'd returned from West Africa, reportedly told health authorities three times that she had a fever before she was placed in quarantine. The Guardian newspaper cited the Spanish paper El Pais as saying that she first contacted health authorities on Sept. 30. The Guardian writes " When she complained of a slight fever and fatigue. Romero Ramos called a specialised service dedicated to occupational risk at the Carlos III hospital where she worked and had treated an Ebola patient, said Antonio Alemany from the regional government of Madrid. But as the nurse's fever had not reached 38.6C, she was advised to visit her local clinic where she was reportedly prescribed paracetamol aspirin . "Days later, according to the El Pa s newspaper, Romero Ramos called the hospital again to complain about her fever. No action was taken. "On Monday, she called the Carlos III hospital again, this time saying she felt terrible. Rather than transport her to the hospital that had treated the two missionaries who had been repatriated with Ebola, Romero Ramos was instructed to call emergency services and head to the hospital closest to her home. She was transported to the Alcorc n hospital by paramedics who were not wearing protective gear, El Pa s reported." Reuters quotes Spanish health authorities as saying today that another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola had tested negative for the disease "The man, a Spaniard who had travelled from Nigeria, was one of several people hospitalised after authorities confirmed on Monday that a Spanish nurse had caught the disease in Madrid. A second nurse was also cleared of Ebola. A third nursing assistant was hospitalised late on Tuesday for monitoring, a source at La Paz hospital said bringing the number of people examined in hospital for Ebola to five, two of whom tested negative." On another note, the husband of the infected nurse has launched an online campaign to save the couple's dog, which authorities had sought to euthanize as a precaution. The Guardian says "In a note distributed on social media by several animal protection organisations, Javier Lim n Romero said health officials had asked for his consent to put down the dog Exc libur. " 'I said no. And they told me that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and put him down,' Romero said in the note. "The appeal was sent from Lim n Romero's isolation ward in the Carlos III Hospital where his wife, Teresa Romero Ramos, is also in quarantine." In Dallas, Thomas Eric Duncan, the man who traveled from Liberia and was diagnosed with the disease in the United States, remains at last report in critical condition. He is being treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital with an experimental drug called brincidofovir. Meanwhile, health officials are watching a group of people who had contact with Duncan after he developed symptoms of the disease but before he was placed in isolation at the hospital. Duncan first sought hospital care on Sept. 25 and was admitted on Sept. 28. Before his hospitalization, 10 of the 48 people being monitored had close contact with him and are being most closely watched. Since the first symptoms of the disease can begin in eight to 10 days after exposure, "this is a very critical week," said Dr. David Lakey, the Texas health commissioner. "We're at a very sensitive period when a contact could develop symptoms. We're monitoring with extreme vigilance." In Freetown, Sierra Leone, burial teams reportedly refused to collect bodies of Ebola victims in the capital and went on strike, apparently demanding more money, though officials there told The Associated Press that the situation has been "resolved." The AP says "In neighboring Liberia, health workers said they planned to strike if their demands for more money and safety equipment were not met by the end of the week." And, in Geneva, the World Bank issued an estimate of the projected cost of the Ebola outbreak, saying it could reach 32.6 billion by the end of 2015 if it spreads significantly beyond worst hit West Africa. "The enormous economic cost of the current outbreak to the affected countries and the world could have been avoided by prudent ongoing investment in health systems strengthening," World Bank President Jim Yong Kim said in a statement.
The chain of putting on and removing a protective suit while treating Ebola will be reviewed, said a spokesman for Hospital La Paz, Carlos III, where a Spanish nurse is being treated for the deadly disease. He added that if any part of the outer suit had come in contact with Teresa Romero it would have been glove to face. The hospital is aware of allegations that a mistake might have been made and will clarify with Mrs Romero what she thinks happened, he said.
Here's a roundup of the latest developments on Ebola. We'll update this post as news happens. In Spain, Teresa Romero Ramos, the nurse who was admitted to a hospital in Madrid after caring for an infected priest who'd returned from West Africa, reportedly told health authorities three times that she had a fever before she was placed in quarantine. The Guardian newspaper cited the Spanish paper El Pais as saying that she first contacted health authorities on Sept. 30. The Guardian writes " When she complained of a slight fever and fatigue. Romero Ramos called a specialised service dedicated to occupational risk at the Carlos III hospital where she worked and had treated an Ebola patient, said Antonio Alemany from the regional government of Madrid. But as the nurse's fever had not reached 38.6C, she was advised to visit her local clinic where she was reportedly prescribed paracetamol aspirin . "Days later, according to the El Pa s newspaper, Romero Ramos called the hospital again to complain about her fever. No action was taken. "On Monday, she called the Carlos III hospital again, this time saying she felt terrible. Rather than transport her to the hospital that had treated the two missionaries who had been repatriated with Ebola, Romero Ramos was instructed to call emergency services and head to the hospital closest to her home. She was transported to the Alcorc n hospital by paramedics who were not wearing protective gear, El Pa s reported." Reuters quotes Spanish health authorities as saying today that another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola had tested negative for the disease "The man, a Spaniard who had travelled from Nigeria, was one of several people hospitalised after authorities confirmed on Monday that a Spanish nurse had caught the disease in Madrid. A second nurse was also cleared of Ebola. A third nursing assistant was hospitalised late on Tuesday for monitoring, a source at La Paz hospital said bringing the number of people examined in hospital for Ebola to five, two of whom tested negative." On another note, the husband of the infected nurse has launched an online campaign to save the couple's dog, which authorities had sought to euthanize as a precaution. The Guardian says "In a note distributed on social media by several animal protection organisations, Javier Lim n Romero said health officials had asked for his consent to put down the dog Exc libur. " 'I said no. And they told me that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and put him down,' Romero said in the note. "The appeal was sent from Lim n Romero's isolation ward in the Carlos III Hospital where his wife, Teresa Romero Ramos, is also in quarantine." A social media campaign to save the dog is running with Twitter hashtag excalibur In Dallas, Thomas Eric Duncan, the man who traveled from Liberia and was diagnosed with the disease in the United States, remains at last report in critical condition. He is being treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital with an experimental drug called brincidofovir. Meanwhile, health officials are watching a group of people who had contact with Duncan after he developed symptoms of the disease but before he was placed in isolation at the hospital. Duncan first sought hospital care on Sept. 25 and was admitted on Sept. 28. Before his hospitalization, 10 of the 48 people being monitored had close contact with him and are being most closely watched. Since the first symptoms of the disease can begin in eight to 10 days after exposure, "this is a very critical week," said Dr. David Lakey, the Texas health commissioner. "We're at a very sensitive period when a contact could develop symptoms. We're monitoring with extreme vigilance." In Freetown, Sierra Leone, burial teams reportedly refused to collect bodies of Ebola victims in the capital and went on strike, apparently demanding more money, though officials there told The Associated Press that the situation has been "resolved." The AP says "In neighboring Liberia, health workers said they planned to strike if their demands for more money and safety equipment were not met by the end of the week." And, in Geneva, the World Bank issued an estimate of the projected cost of the Ebola outbreak, saying it could reach 32.6 billion by the end of 2015 if it spreads significantly beyond worst hit West Africa. "The enormous economic cost of the current outbreak to the affected countries and the world could have been avoided by prudent ongoing investment in health systems strengthening," World Bank President Jim Yong Kim said in a statement.
Here's a roundup of the latest developments on Ebola. We'll update this post as news happens. In Spain, Teresa Romero Ramos, the nurse who was admitted to a hospital in Madrid after caring for an infected priest who'd returned from West Africa, reportedly told health authorities three times that she had a fever before she was placed in quarantine. There were also reports that she may have become infected by touching gloves to her face while she was removing a protective suit she wore while caring for an Ebola patient. Meanwhile, despite an appeal from Romero's husband, protests in the streets of Madrid and and online campaign to save the couple's dog, El Mundo newspaper reports that Excalibur was put down at a veterinary hospital in the capital. Ealrier, The Guardian reported "In a note distributed on social media by several animal protection organisations, Javier Lim n Romero said health officials had asked for his consent to put down the dog Exc libur. " 'I said no. And they told me that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and put him down,' Romero said in the note. "The appeal was sent from Lim n Romero's isolation ward in the Carlos III Hospital where his wife, Teresa Romero Ramos, is also in quarantine." A social media campaign to save the dog had been running with the Twitter hashtag excalibur The Guardian newspaper cited the Spanish paper El Pais as saying that she first contacted health authorities on Sept. 30. The Guardian writes " When she complained of a slight fever and fatigue. Romero Ramos called a specialised service dedicated to occupational risk at the Carlos III hospital where she worked and had treated an Ebola patient, said Antonio Alemany from the regional government of Madrid. But as the nurse's fever had not reached 38.6C, she was advised to visit her local clinic where she was reportedly prescribed paracetamol aspirin . "Days later, according to the El Pa s newspaper, Romero Ramos called the hospital again to complain about her fever. No action was taken. "On Monday, she called the Carlos III hospital again, this time saying she felt terrible. Rather than transport her to the hospital that had treated the two missionaries who had been repatriated with Ebola, Romero Ramos was instructed to call emergency services and head to the hospital closest to her home. She was transported to the Alcorc n hospital by paramedics who were not wearing protective gear, El Pa s reported." Reuters quotes Spanish health authorities as saying today that another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola had tested negative for the disease "The man, a Spaniard who had travelled from Nigeria, was one of several people hospitalised after authorities confirmed on Monday that a Spanish nurse had caught the disease in Madrid. A second nurse was also cleared of Ebola. A third nursing assistant was hospitalised late on Tuesday for monitoring, a source at La Paz hospital said bringing the number of people examined in hospital for Ebola to five, two of whom tested negative." The chief medical officer at La Paz University Hospital, Dr. German Ramirez, was quoted in El Mundo as saying that Romero contracted Ebola when she touched her face with gloves she had used in the room where she was treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, a priest who had worked in Liberia. Viejo later died from the diseases. In Dallas, Thomas Eric Duncan, the man who traveled from Liberia and was diagnosed with the disease in the United States, remains at last report in critical condition. He is being treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital with an experimental drug called brincidofovir. Meanwhile, health officials are watching a group of people who had contact with Duncan after he developed symptoms of the disease but before he was placed in isolation at the hospital. Duncan first sought hospital care on Sept. 25 and was admitted on Sept. 28. Before his hospitalization, 10 of the 48 people being monitored had close contact with him and are being most closely watched. Since the first symptoms of the disease can begin in eight to 10 days after exposure, "this is a very critical week," said Dr. David Lakey, the Texas health commissioner. "We're at a very sensitive period when a contact could develop symptoms. We're monitoring with extreme vigilance." In Freetown, Sierra Leone, burial teams reportedly refused to collect bodies of Ebola victims in the capital and went on strike, apparently demanding more money, though officials there told The Associated Press that the situation has been "resolved." The AP says "In neighboring Liberia, health workers said they planned to strike if their demands for more money and safety equipment were not met by the end of the week." And, in Geneva, the World Bank issued an estimate of the projected cost of the Ebola outbreak, saying it could reach 32.6 billion by the end of 2015 if it spreads significantly beyond worst hit West Africa. "The enormous economic cost of the current outbreak to the affected countries and the world could have been avoided by prudent ongoing investment in health systems strengthening," World Bank President Jim Yong Kim said in a statement.
Here's a roundup of the latest developments on Ebola. We'll update this post as news happens. In Spain, Teresa Romero Ramos, the nurse who was admitted to a hospital in Madrid after caring for an infected priest who'd returned from West Africa, reportedly told health authorities three times that she had a fever before she was placed in quarantine. There were also reports that she may have become infected by touching gloves to her face while she was removing a protective suit she wore while caring for an Ebola patient. Meanwhile, El Mundo, which reported earlier that the dog belonging to Romero and her husband had been euthanized as a precaution, has now backtracked on that story, saying the that Excalibur is still alive. Earlier, The Guardian reported "In a note distributed on social media by several animal protection organisations, Javier Lim n Romero said health officials had asked for his consent to put down the dog Exc libur. " 'I said no. And they told me that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and put him down,' Romero said in the note. "The appeal was sent from Lim n Romero's isolation ward in the Carlos III Hospital where his wife, Teresa Romero Ramos, is also in quarantine." A social media campaign to save the dog has running with the Twitter hashtag excalibur The Guardian newspaper cited the Spanish paper El Pais as saying that the nurse first contacted health authorities on Sept. 30. The Guardian writes " ... she complained of a slight fever and fatigue. Romero Ramos called a specialised service dedicated to occupational risk at the Carlos III hospital where she worked and had treated an Ebola patient, said Antonio Alemany from the regional government of Madrid. But as the nurse's fever had not reached 38.6C, she was advised to visit her local clinic where she was reportedly prescribed paracetamol aspirin . "Days later, according to the El Pa s newspaper, Romero Ramos called the hospital again to complain about her fever. No action was taken. "On Monday, she called the Carlos III hospital again, this time saying she felt terrible. Rather than transport her to the hospital that had treated the two missionaries who had been repatriated with Ebola, Romero Ramos was instructed to call emergency services and head to the hospital closest to her home. She was transported to the Alcorc n hospital by paramedics who were not wearing protective gear, El Pa s reported." Reuters quotes Spanish health authorities as saying today that another person being monitored in Madrid for Ebola had tested negative for the disease "The man, a Spaniard who had travelled from Nigeria, was one of several people hospitalised after authorities confirmed on Monday that a Spanish nurse had caught the disease in Madrid. "A second nurse was also cleared of Ebola. A third nursing assistant was hospitalised late on Tuesday for monitoring, a source at La Paz hospital said bringing the number of people examined in hospital for Ebola to five, two of whom tested negative." The chief medical officer at La Paz University Hospital, Dr. German Ramirez, was quoted in El Mundo as saying that Romero contracted Ebola when she touched her face with gloves she had used in the room where she was treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, a priest who had worked in Liberia. Viejo later died from the disease. In Dallas, as we reported in another post, Thomas Eric Duncan, the man who traveled from Liberia and was diagnosed with the disease in the United States, has died at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital. Hospital officials say Duncan "succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola" this morning. In a statement, the hospital said "He fought courageously in this battle. Our professionals, the doctors and nurses in the unit, as well as the entire Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas community, are also grieving his passing. We have offered the family our support and condolences at this difficult time." Meanwhile, health officials are watching a group of people who had contact with Duncan after he developed symptoms of the disease but before he was placed in isolation at the hospital. Duncan first sought hospital care on Sept. 25 and was admitted on Sept. 28. Before his hospitalization, 10 of the 48 people being monitored had close contact with him and are being most closely watched. Since the first symptoms of the disease can begin in eight to 10 days after exposure, "this is a very critical week," said Dr. David Lakey, the Texas health commissioner. "We're at a very sensitive period when a contact could develop symptoms. We're monitoring with extreme vigilance." In Omaha, Neb., a freelance cameraman, Ashoka Mukpo, who contracted Ebola in West Africa and is being treated at Nebraska Medical Center, will reportedly receive blood donated by Dr. Kent Brantly, who earlier survived the disease. Antibodies against Ebola in Brantly's blood could help Mukpo fight off the infection, officials say. In Freetown, Sierra Leone, burial teams reportedly refused to collect bodies of Ebola victims in the capital and went on strike, apparently demanding more money, though officials there told The Associated Press that the situation has been "resolved." The AP says "In neighboring Liberia, health workers said they planned to strike if their demands for more money and safety equipment were not met by the end of the week." And in Geneva, the World Bank issued an estimate of the projected cost of the Ebola outbreak, saying it could reach 32.6 billion by the end of 2015 if the virus spreads significantly beyond worst hit West Africa. "The enormous economic cost of the current outbreak to the affected countries and the world could have been avoided by prudent ongoing investment in health systems strengthening," World Bank President Jim Yong Kim said in a statement.
There's remarkable news out of Spain today about the nurse who was part of the team treating a Spanish priest who later died of Ebola and has now come down with Ebola herself. Teresa Romero Ramos's case is the first apparent case of Ebola transmission in Europe. The World Health Organization is saying, not surprisingly, that we should expect more cases in Europe. But there's a lot of news suggesting Spanish authorities, or at least the doctors at her facility, were fairly casual about monitoring the members of their team for signs of contagion. Despite receiving some training in Ebola safety protocols, Romero apparently touched her face with her protective glove after leaving the quarantine room where the priest was being treated. This is the best guess as to how she was infected. It seems like there were shortcomings in Romero's training. And I would imagine that there is some inevitable level of mistakes on the part of medical personnel when dealing with such highly contagious fluids. (Romero had gone into the priest's quarantine room to change his diaper when this incident appears to have occurred.) After all, numerous health care workers have accidentally stuck themselves with needles over the last three decades, though thankfully the great majority do not end up getting HIV. It's always important in cases like this that we, in most case outsiders, not jump to the conclusion that everyone's a moron just because some mistake occurs. But what happened after Romero developed a fever and until she was clearly deathly ill seems iffy enough that it's hard not to suspect a major failure of judgement and procedures. This from the Daily Beast ... When Teresa Romero Ramos, the Spanish nurse now afflicted with the deadly Ebola virus, first felt feverish on September 30, she reportedly called her family doctor and told him she had been working with Ebola patients. Her fever was low grade, just 38 degrees Celsius, far enough below the 38.6 degree Ebola red alert temperature to not cause alarm. Her doctor told her to take two aspirin, keep an eye on her fever and keep in touch, according to Spanish press reports quoting Romero's husband Lim n Romero. He says she didn't initially exhibit any of the other Ebola symptoms vomiting, diarrhea, nausea, and she didn't feel sick enough to stay in bed. Romero apparently took great comfort from the fact that her temperature had not reached the threshold for concern about Ebola. 38 celsius is 100.4 Fahrenheit. She had time off from work, ran errands, caught up with friends and even sat for a government civil service exam. Just in ordinary terms 100.4 is a borderline fever. And I'm not sure how definitive that 38.6 (101.48 F) threshold is considered. But it would at least seem like you'd have a more aggressive regimen for people who worked directly with an Ebola patient. But it apparently got worse from there. According to Spanish press reports quoting the Spanish nurses' union, Romero called Carlos III hospital several times between September 30 and October 2 when her fever finally hit the 38.6 threshold. Still, it took until October 6 when she had become so deathly ill she was begging for an Ebola test before anyone at the hospital where she worked reportedly reacted. Then, rather than immediately isolating her and rushing her to the special ward used to treat the previous Ebola patients, they told her to go to the nearby emergency room at Alcorc n, where press reports say she sat in the public waiting room for several hours absent of any protective gear. "I think I have ebola," she reportedly told anyone who would listen. But no one took notice until her first test came back positive. By then, dripping with fevered sweat, she would have been inarguably contagious. Not surprisingly, Spanish public health officials are now being scrutinized pretty aggressively not only by the public but also by EU authorities. To further complicate matters, there's further controversy and a social media campaign opposing Spanish authorities decision to euthanize Romero's dog.
MADRID (AFP) A Spanish nurse may have become infected with Ebola when she touched her face with a glove as she removed her protective suit after treating a missionary who had the deadly virus, a doctor treating her said on Wednesday. Health officials say Teresa Romero twice entered the room of Spanish missionary Manual Garcia Viejo once to clean him and the second time after he died on September 25, just days after being repatriated from Sierra Leone. Doctor German Ramirez of Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital said Romero told him she remembers she touched her face with her gloves as she removed her protective suit after leaving the quarantine room at the hospital where the missionary was being treated. "She thinks she remembers that it was during the first time she entered the room but we should continue to look into it," he told reporters gathered outside the hospital.
Thomas Eric Duncan, the first man diagnosed with Ebola in the US, has died, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital says. A release from the hospital said "It is with profound sadness and heartfelt disappointment that we must inform you of the death of Thomas Eric Duncan this morning at 7 51am." "Mr Duncan succumbed to an insidious disease, Ebola. He fought courageously in this battle." The Liberian national picked up the killer virus in Liberia before flying to Texas where he was admitted to the Dallas hospital. US authorities are monitoring about 50 people who came into contact with him. Meanwhile the Spanish nurse being treated for Ebola says she touched her face with a tainted protective glove after helping treat a man dying from the virus. Theresa Romero (40) is in quarantine in a Madrid hospital but told doctors she believes she made the mistake after cleaning up after the man. Heath officials said she had twice entered the room of Spanish missionary Manuel Garcia Viejo once to change his incontinence pad and then to retrieve items after he had died. Mrs Romero is the first person to contract the virus outside Africa. She earlier told El Mundo she had no idea how she was infected and that she had followed all precautions. Another three people are also quarantined at the Carlos III hospital, including the woman's husband who had made a video appeal for authorities not to destroy the couple's dog Excalibur. But according to unconfirmed reports the animal was euthanised at the veterinary hospital at Madrid's Complutense University on Wednesday. Some 50 other people who either had contact with Mrs Romero or treated one of the two missionaries who died at the hospital are also being monitored. Spanish leader Mariano Rajoy has called for calm and promised "transparency" over the scare, which has raised questions over whether strict safety rules were properly followed. As West Africa struggles to cope with a spiralling infection rate, burial teams in Sierra Leone have reportedly gone on strike. The workers, who arguably have one of the world's most dangerous jobs, complain they have not been paid. The situation is "very embarrassing", said health ministry spokesman Sidie Yahya Tunis. He promised that money was available for the workers. "We haven't been paid for two weeks, so we need our money right now," said one angry worker. "We don't even care if dead bodies have been littered all over the city all we want is our money. We've been stigmatised in our communities, so let the government pay us our money." 600 people have died from the virus in Sierra Leone, according to the World Health Organisation (WHO), and more than 3,400 in total. The virus has swept through Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone and Nigeria, with the World Bank saying the financial impact could hit US 32.6bn ( 25.7bn) by the end of the year. The US has ordered security agents at airports and other entry ports to screen arriving travellers for signs of the disease. The United Nations, meanwhile, has said one of its medical officials in Liberia has tested positive for Ebola and is receiving treatment. The unnamed official is the second member of their mission to contract the virus the other died on September 25th.
Madrid A Spanish nurse may have become infected with Ebola when she touched her face with a glove as she removed her protective suit after treating a missionary who had the deadly virus, a doctor treating her said on Wednesday. Health officials say Teresa Romero twice entered the room of Spanish missionary Manual Garcia Viejo once to clean him and the second time after he died on 25 September, just days after being repatriated from Sierra Leone. Doctor German Ramirez of Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital said Romero told him she remembers she touched her face with her gloves as she removed her protective suit after leaving the quarantine room at the hospital where the missionary was being treated. "She thinks she remembers that it was during the first time she entered the room but we should continue to look into it," he told reporters gathered outside the hospital. "It seems like it was the gloves. The gloves touched the face," Ramirez said, adding the infected nurse had authorised him to speak to the media. "It is possible that this was not a mistake as such. It could simply be an accident and logically, probably, she could not remember at the beginning because of the state of her health." Romero had said in an interview published in El Mundo on Wednesday that she had "no idea" how she could have contracted the virus. But in an interview on Wednesday in the online edition of El Pais newspaper, she said she thought she may have become infected when she removed her protective suit. "I think the mistake was when I removed the suit. I see it as the most critical moment in which it could have happened but I am not sure," she told the newspaper by telephone from her room at the hospital where she is being treated in isolation. Romero is the first case of Ebola being transmitted outside of West Africa, where a months long outbreak has killed nearly 3 500 people and infected at least twice as many.
Doctor treating Spanish nurse says she might have become accidentally infected with Ebola when taking off her protective equipment Spanish health professionals have taken aim at the scant amount of training offered to those on the frontline fighting the Ebola virus as the investigation continues into how a Spanish nurse became the first known person to contract the disease outside of west Africa. On Wednesday, the doctor treating Ebola patient Teresa Romero Ramos said the infection might have been caused by "an accident" when the 44 year old was taking off her protective equipment. Germ n Ram rez said he had spoken to the nurse three times in an effort to home in how she got infected. Romero Ramos, he said, believes she might have touched her face with her gloves while she was taking off her protective equipment. In an interview from her hospital bed, Romero Ramos told Spanish broadcaster Cuatro that while she had been given training on how to put on and take off the protective equipment, it was "little training". She refused to give more details. Her interview came as the number of patients in quarantine at Madrid's Carlos III hospital rose to six. Along with Romero Ramos and her husband, patients include three nurses who attended to the missionaries and a man who had travelled to Spain from Nigeria. Initial tests indicate that one of the nurses and the traveller are both free from Ebola. Despite the growing number of patients, health workers said they had had little preparation to deal with Ebola. For Amelia Batanero, a nurse at Madrid's La Paz hospital, the call to attend to the growing number of Ebola patients could come any day now as she is on the rotation list to work at the Carlos III hospital. This, in spite of the fact that she has never stepped foot in the hospital or that her only training took place months ago. "We haven't learned how to use these suits, we don't know the protocol on how to treat Ebola," she said. In July she was part of a group of nurses in Madrid who brought a complaint before a judge over their "lack of training and knowledge regarding Ebola protocols". Dr Santiago Yus, a specialist in intensive care, echoed Batanero's concerns, telling El Mundo that he would likely be treating Ebola patients in the coming days. "I'm not ready, I'm not trained," he said. The doctor, who has more than 30 years experience, said he had only been given a few 10 minute briefings months before and further questions had been directed to photographs on the wall explaining how to put on and take off the protective suit. This week, he was part of a group of 15 health workers who met with hospital management to warn them about their lack of preparation in facing Ebola. As the training was given during the summer, many health professionals were away on vacation, said Alda Recas of AME, an association of nurses in Madrid. "When some people came back from their vacations, they were told they would have to take care of the missionaries. They would call you an hour, or half an hour, before their shift to show you how to put on the protective gear." The situation is far worse at the Alcorc n hospital, where health workers never expected to be on the frontline of an Ebola outbreak, said one worker who declined to be named. "We don't even have the required safety level at this hospital to take on Ebola." On Monday, a screen and security tape made up the makeshift isolation unit for Romero Ramos while she was being tested. Doctors refused to confirm to her that she had twice tested positive for Ebola. As the nurse explained in her interview with Cuatro, "I asked the doctor for the result and he didn't want to give it to me. Nobody told me anything." She eventually learned that she was infected with Ebola after checking news headlines on a mobile phone. Days after Romero Ramos was transferred to the Carlos III hospital, the zone where she was treated in the Alcorc n hospital remains untouched. Cleaning staff have refused to clean the area, arguing that they don't have the right equipment or training to deal with the cleanup. As the contracting company hastily attempts to meet their demands, a plastic curtain has been placed over the area. "We might be able to go into there on Thursday," said one worker. The blame for the varied response, said Roberto Tornamira of the workers' union Fes UGT Madrid, lay with the Spanish health ministry as each hospital had been left to create a protocol on treating Ebola on its own. Calling it an "incredible" lapse of responsibility by health authorities, he noted that the lack of uniformity could have far reaching consequences. "If this were to become an outbreak in Spain, it means each hospital would treat the virus in a different way." Meanwhile, dozens of animal rights activists scuffled with police outside the apartment complex where Romero Ramos and her husband live, trying to stop workers from taking away their dog, Excalibur. Protesters briefly halted a police van as it pulled away with the family pet inside, but police with batons cleared a path. Madrid's regional government later said the animal had been sedated, euthanised and incinerated. Authorities had obtained a court order to kill the dog, saying they could not rule out the possibility Excalibur could spread the virus.
Spanish government claims that its hospital protocols for dealing with Ebola and other high risk diseases are in top shape were given short shrift by a number of local Madrid medical staff. One doctor in Madrid's Carlos III hospital who is due to treat Teresa Romero Ramos the Spanish nurse who contracted Ebola from a patient at the same hospital told El Mundo that his course for wearing protective clothing in highly infectious cases had lasted around 10 minutes. Correctly putting on, or taking off, protective clothing requires a lengthy, complex, protocol but is vital in preventing the spread of infection. Ms Romero Ramos said she believed that the way she removed that clothing, after treating one of two Spanish missionaries who later died of Ebola, could have been a cause of her own infection. "I see it as the most critical moment, the one in which it the infection could have happened, but I don't know for sure," she said. A health official from Madrid's regional government later accused the nurse of changing her version of events, saying "today she recognised she made a mistake when she took off her protection suit something she systematically previously denied." He later qualified his statement by saying "I don't blame her. It was an accident, she's already got enough to handle." Reports said that Ms Romero Ramos reported having a fever to the hospital but, because her temperature was not high enough, she ended up going to a local clinic where she was given paracetamol. It is also reported that she only learned that she had tested positive for Ebola later from media reports. The doctor quoted in El Mundo has worked for more than 30 years in the intensive care units in the jointly administered hospitals of La Paz and Carlos III. He said he and more than a dozen colleagues told the hospital's sub director "not to insult our intelligence by telling us that we have been trained for this". A union representative also told El Mundo that although some workers had had up to 50 hours' training in such cases, "none of it was in a simulated patient staff situation". Teresa Romero Ramos, the Spanish nurse who became the first person to contract Ebola in Europe Meanwhile, auxiliary staff in the La Paz hospital said they had had no more than a 30 minute course. Other staff at Carlos III have criticised recent cuts for underlying deficiencies in training. "When Carlos III was the reference point for infectious diseases in Spain , the staff were perfectly trained," Julian Ordo ez, of Spain's largest trade union, UGT, told the ABC newspaper. "But all of that was dismantled, only to be put back together again ... in a real hurry when the latest cases broke." On Monday, health minister Ana Mato claimed "We have professionals who are magnificently prepared to deal with this situation and with the technical and organisational capability to face it." Since then, Ms Mato has been under rising pressure to provide much greater clarity surrounding the case and why it occurred, particularly given that the World Health Organisation assessment is that Spain should have the essential infrastructure and resources to deal with an Ebola outbreak.
Spain's government urged calm on Wednesday over the case of a nurse who caught Ebola in a Madrid hospital as the World Health Organization warned other isolated infections in Europe were "unavoidable". Apart from the infected nurse the first person to contract the disease outside Africa doctors in Madrid have isolated five other people and are monitoring dozens more. One of the doctors treating the nurse, Teresa Romero, said she may have caught the deadly virus after touching her face with an infected glove. She had been treating a missionary flown back to Madrid's La Paz III hospital from west Africa with the disease. "It seems like it was the gloves. The gloves touched the face," doctor German Ramirez told reporters outside the hospital. The Ebola epidemic has killed nearly 3,500 people in west Africa this year and the World Bank warned on Wednesday it could cripple the region's economy to the tune of at least 32 billion (25 billion euros). Spain was still scrambling on Wednesday to identify people who came into contact with Romero. Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy called for calm and promised "transparency" over the scare, which has sparked fierce criticism of Spanish safeguards. The World Health Organization also moved to calm fears of wider contagion in Europe. Its regional director, Zsuzsanna Jakab, said sporadic cases in Europe were "unavoidable" but the risk of a full outbreak were "extremely low". "European countries are among the best prepared in the world" to tackle such diseases, she added in a statement. 'The mistake' Romero initially told reporters she had "no idea" how she got infected. But in an interview with El Pais newspaper, by phone from her hospital bed, she said it may have occurred when removing her protective suit. "I think the mistake was when I removed the suit. I see it as the most critical moment in which it could have happened but I am not sure," she said. In an earlier recording published on the website of El Mundo newspaper, she sounded tired and groggy but said she was feeling "a bit better". Romero became ill after caring for two elderly Spanish missionaries who died of Ebola following their return from west Africa. Doctors at the hospital put her husband and another "suspect case" an engineer who recently travelled from Nigeria in isolation. Three other members of the hospital's medical staff were also admitted as a precaution. Authorities have also ordered that the Romero family dog be put down as a precaution, sparking protests from animal rights activists. PM promises investigation The European Commission has written to the Spanish health ministry demanding an explanation of how the infection occurred. Officials said they were monitoring 52 people mostly health staff. They said Romero began to feel ill on September 30 while on leave after treating the missionaries, but she was not admitted to hospital until six days later. Rajoy told parliament that officials would "investigate what happened and why this contagion occurred". Health unions complained that staff had not been adequately trained to treat Ebola patients safely. Some 3,439 people have died from Ebola out of 7,478 cases in the current outbreak across five west African nations Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal according to the latest WHO tally. The EU announced it will start airlifting 100 tonnes of relief aid on Friday to Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea including masks, gloves and medicine. Ebola causes severe fever, vomiting, diarrhoea and sometimes internal and external bleeding. It spreads through contact and bodily fluids. There is no vaccine and no widely available cure, but several treatments have been fast tracked for development. Several patients have been treated for Ebola in Europe and the United States in the current outbreak, but until the Madrid case all had been infected in Africa. The United Nations mission in Liberia announced on Wednesday a second Ebola infection among its international staff there.
Some staffers at the hospital Teresa Romero worked at said their gear wasn't good enough quality. But if it was, human error must have led to Romero becoming infected, one doctor told the Daily News. Spanish nurse Teresa Romero has come down with Ebola despite presumably shielding herself from the virus with protective gear. Staff at the hospital where Romero was working reportedly said that their hazmat suits weren't high enough quality to protect them from the deadly virus. But if her gear was suitable in accordance with European laws, then it's up to the wearer to be adequately trained in how to wear it and remove it, according to Dr. Ojan Assadian, a microbiologist at the Medical University of Vienna and a consultant for Ansell, which makes protective gear for infection control. "Even if you have premium products which meet all the required specifications, you also need the knowledge and experience of using them correctly," Assadian told the Daily News. Assadian said that because Romero was an auxiliary nurse a nurse's assistant and not a registered nurse she may not have had the proper training to care for Ebola patients. "They need to be trained (and) to have some basic knowledge on how infectious organisms are transmitted," he said. According to a report in El Pais, Romero thinks she touched her face after caring for an Ebola infected priest, which may have launched the disease into her mucus membrane. ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE. mengel nydailynews.com Related Stories Excalibur the Spanish dog put down after possibly contracting Ebola Duncan likely died due to high exposure to Ebola expert Questions and answers on dogs and Ebola risks
The nurse in Madrid who became the first case infected with Ebola outside West Africa, repeatedly tried to report her symptoms to health authorities but was fobbed off with paracetamol before being finally diagnosed with the deadly virus and put into isolation, it was reported on Wednesday. Mar a Teresa Romero Ramos has admitted that she likely caught the virus when she touched her face with a contaminated glove as she removed her protective suit after visiting the room of the infected missionary priest who was repatriated to Madrid from Sierra Leone. It was the first indication as to how she became infected with the deadly haemorrhagic fever, as Spanish health officials struggled to contain the virus and placed two more nurses under quarantine and dozens of others under observation for symptoms of Ebola. However, it emerged that a catalogue of errors led to her not being isolated in a specialised unit until six days after she showed signs of the illness and after she had sought medical advice three times. The 44 year old believes she became infected after cleaning up waste in the room of Manuel Garcia Viejo, the 69 year old missionary who died on September 25. Related Articles Spanish Ebola nurse's dog put down despite campaign 08 Oct 2014 Ebola crisis Britain urged to bring in airport screening like US 08 Oct 2014 What next for America's efforts to control Ebola? 08 Oct 2014 Protest over fate of the 'Ebola dog' 08 Oct 2014 How doctors kit up to protect against Ebola 08 Oct 2014 "I think the error was in the removal of the (protective) suit," Mrs Romero told Spanish daily El Pa s newspaper in a telephone interview from her hospital bed. "I see that as the most critical moment, when something could have happened. But I'm not sure," she said. Health investigators attempting to reconstruct events that led to her infection confirmed that she had told them she may have touched her face while removing the protective suit, an error that she was not aware of at the time, and therefore did not report. "She has talked to me about the gloves, she touched her face with the gloves. That's what she remembers and what she has told me three times," Germ n Ram rez, one of the doctors at Carlos III hospital where the nurse is being treated, said outside the hospital. When she left work to go on holiday, the day after the missionary had died, the nurse was told to take her temperature twice a day and report any symptoms to the specialist occupational risk team at the Carlos III hospital. Four days later, on Sept 30, she reported suffering from a mild fever and general fatigue but as her temperature had not reached the 38.6C threshold, she was advised to visit her local clinic, where she was reportedly prescribed paracetamol. Several days later and with no sign of her fever abating she again contacted health authorities but no action was taken. It was not until Sunday night, when her fever had reached 38.6C barrier, that she was advised by clinicians at the Carlos III unit to contact her local hospital. She was then transported in an ambulance by paramedics not dressed in protective clothing to the emergency department of the Alcorc n hospital. Once there, after reportedly waiting some time in a busy waiting room, she informed medics that she feared she may have contracted the Ebola virus. "The nurses who dealt with me were wearing normal clothes without any protection when they took me to hospital," Mrs Romero told El Pa s. Hospital staff at Alcorc n have complained that the patient was left in an improvised isolation area marked off by a curtained screen and security tape. Finally, six hours after tests confirmed she was infected with Ebola, she was transferred in a specialist ambulance to the isolation unit set up at Carlos III hospital where the missionaries had been treated. Some of the 84 people now under observation by Madrid health authorities are those she had contact with at her local hospital, others are family and friends with whom she had close contact with while feeling unwell, and the remainder those who also treated the repatriated missionaries. Her husband is in quarantine although has yet to show symptoms of the virus. So too, are three other nurses who were in the original medical teams assigned to care for the missionaries. The coordinator of emergency health services at the Spanish Ministry of Health, Fernando Sim n, has conceded that it would have been better to have admitted the nurse into hospital earlier. He said that although she hadn't presented the symptoms used by clinicians to suspect a case of Ebola, her history of having been in contact with the stricken missionaries meant it would have been preferable to err on the side of caution. "In this case it would have been better to have admitted her for observation on September 30 rather than wait for the more serious symptoms," said Mr Sim n. Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy appealed for calm over Spain's Ebola outbreak and pledged to step up efforts to contain the virus. "Let the professionals do their work," he told the Spanish parliament on Wednesday. "What we have to do right now is be alert but stay calm this is the government's position."
Madrid, Oct 9 (IANS) Teresa Romero, the Spanish nurse who has been infected with the Ebola virus could have accidentally brushed her face with a glove as she was taking off her isolation suit. That is the explanation given by doctor German Ramirez of internal medicine at the La Paz Hospital in Madrid Wednesday to explain the first case of Ebola contagion outside of Africa, Xinhua reported. Ramirez said that rather than an error, this was an "accident", which may have happened after Romero was cleaning the room used by an Ebola victim, Manuel Garcia Viejo, in the Carlos III Hospital, which is under the authority of La Paz.
Teresa Romero Ramos read about her diagnosis when was waiting to be quarantined in Madrid The nurse who is the first person to catch Ebola outside West Africa found out she had the disease from a newspaper website. Teresa Romero Ramos was waiting to be quarantined in Madrid when she read on her mobile phone she had tested positive. She said "Nobody told me anything. I found out on my mobile. I suspected something because at the hospital they stopped coming in. "Nobody told me to my face." Poll loading ... Earlier Ms Ramos, 44, said she accidentally touched her face with gloves after treating an infected Spanish missionary who later died. The nurse was part of a 30 strong team at the Carlos III hospital treating the 69 year old who had been repatriated after catching Ebola in Sierra Leone. She said she might have become infected when removing protective clothing after cleaning the priest's room. She said "I think the error was the removal of the suit. I can see the moment it may have happened." A hospital official spoke to Ms Ramos and said it confirmed the infection "may not have been an error, but rather an accident". Her husband Javier Limon, also in quarantine with three other people in Madrid, has been fighting in vain to stop their pet dog being put down because he may be infected. Around 300,000 people signed an online petition to spare the dog.
Spanish Ebola Nurse Reported Symptoms 3 Times Before Isolation It emerged Wednesday that Teresa Romero Ramos, a nurse who caught Ebola after helping treat a patient, made multiple attempts to report her fever A Spanish nurse who contracted Ebola in Madrid this week told health authorities at least three times she had a fever before she was finally placed in quarantine, it emerged Wednesday, despite having helped treat a patient who later died of the virus. The nurse, named by the media as Teresa Romero Ramos, is the first person to have caught the Ebola virus outside of Africa in the current outbreak. Romero Ramos first called a specialized service dedicated to occupational risk at Carlos III hospital in Madrid on Sept. 30 and complained of a slight fever and fatigue, a government official said, but was advised to visit her local clinic. She called again a few days later,the Guardian reports, but nothing was done. When Romero Ramos called for a third time on Monday, she was finally transported to a hospital by paramedics who did not wear protective gear. Despite warning staff that she had contracted Ebola, she remained in a bed in the emergency room separated from other patients only by curtains. "It would have been better if she had entered the hospital on the 30th," Fernando Sim n, emergencies coordinator for the Health Ministry, acknowledged to the press this week. Some have criticized Spanish authorities for not providing sufficient training in Ebola protocols, and nurses complained that there had been no simulations of Ebola treatment by the time two infected missionaries arrived from west Africa. The Spanish prime minister Mariano Rajoy said Wednesday morning that the Spanish healthcare system was "one of the best in the world," and asked that "health professionals, who have a proven reputation, be left to do their work." The Guardian
Cop was being probed for criminal ties when investigators stumbled on NYPD ticket fixing scandal Yes, he's caught on tape ripping off an alleged crook, yes, he's caught on tape driving a criminal to a robbery, and yes he's caught on tape driving a van allegedly filled with heroin but that doesn't mean Police Officer Jose Ramos is a criminal, his defense lawyer told jurors Wednesday. "Is he a great cop? No," Matthew Kluger said of his client, who's standing trial on robbery and drug running charges. "He did things he shouldn't have done, and said things he shouldn't have said," Kluger acknowledged, but "he did not commit a crime." Ramos, 45, is the central figure in the so called "Tix Fix" case the widespread investigation into ticket and summons fixing by cops that resulted in hundreds of officers being disciplined and 16 being indicted. In opening statements in Bronx Supreme Court, prosecutor Omer Wiczyk said the NYPD's Internal Affairs Bureau began investigating the Desert Storm veteran after getting an anonymous tip in 2008. The tipster said that unbeknownst to the NYPD, Ramos was running two barber shops, and Ramos' best friend, a convicted felon named Lee King, was selling "pounds and pounds of marijuana out of them." Ramos also let King use his NYPD parking placard, and the two shared a cell phone, the tipster said. Wiczyk said cops thought the claims sounded "ridiculous," but they began investigating, and discovered they were all true. They ran wiretaps on Ramos, and found he also had ties a to a known drug dealer and a thief not the type of people a police officer is supposed to be consorting with, the prosecutor said. The question was "how deep" Ramos was involved, the prosecutor said and investigators set out to find out. They arrested one of the drug dealers, Harry (Ike) Mingo and he offered to give up Ramos, the prosecutor said. Investigators used Mingo to run a series of "integrity tests" against Ramos and he failed each one "eagerly," Wiczyk said. In a taped October 2009 meeting with Mingo, Ramos talked about "home invasions" and stealing money and drugs from drug dealers. On instructions from IAB, Mingo then went back to Ramos, and said he knew of a drug dealer who had money in his hotel room that they could swipe, the prosecutor said. Ramos agreed to drive Mingo to and from the hotel, he said. They then split the 20,000 in cash Mingo "stole" from the empty room, which had actually been rented out by IAB. In the second "test," Mingo said he had somebody coming with a lot of cash to buy black market electronics from him, but he didn't have the merchandise. Ramos, the prosecutor said, offered a solution Mingo should take the money, and then Ramos would pretend to arrest him before he handed over the goods. Mingo agreed, and the 40th Precinct cop left his post in the middle of a shift to make the bogus arrest, the prosecutor said. Ramos let the "buyer" another undercover cop leave, and then Mingo gave Ramos half of the 30,000 he'd been handed by the undercover. Next, in an effort to find out whether Ramos was working with any other cops, IAB had Mingo set him up with a drug dealer from Miami named Lolo who was another undercover cop, prosecutors said. "Lolo" told Ramos he wanted to move some heroin from The Bronx to Brooklyn, and asked if Ramos and another cop could drive the two vans full of drugs, Wiczyk said. But Ramos couldn't find another officer to help him, so he told Lolo he could do it all himself, the prosecutor said. He even offered to park one of the vans near a station house with a police parking placard in the window an offer the stunned "dealer" declined, Wiczyk said. Ramos wound up driving one of the vans, and got paid 10,000 for the work, Wiczyk said. Investigators "tested him, and he failed, again, and again, and again," the prosecutor said. Kluger acknowledged his client may have violated some police guidelines. "He was not an exemplary police officer," he said but his offenses don't rise to the level of criminality. In the second "test," Kluger said arresting Mingo mid deal was "sneaky," but it wasn't robbery. And in the third test, Ramos "knew" there weren't any drugs in the van. As for incriminating comments his client made on the tapes, they were "posturing," he said. "Everyone in this case is an actor," he said. "The police were acting like drug dealers, Ike is acting for the police, and Jose Ramos is acting for Ike." Neither side mentioned the greater ticket fixing case, which was spurred by a comment that was captured on a Ramos wiretap made about his fixing a ticket for somebody. Ramos, who his lawyer said has been suspended without pay, had no fellow officers in court to support him on Wednesday. Even if Ramos, who's being held without bail, beats the nine criminal charges against him in the current case, he has a long way to go before he can be a free man. He's also facing numerous criminal charges in five other indictments, including one for ticket fixing, another for insurance fraud and selling counterfeit DVDs, another for giving up the name of a confidential informant to an alleged drug dealer, and yet another for allegedly dipping into his police pension to try to hire a hit man to kill a witness against him. dgregorian nydailynews.com
Madrid (AFP) A Spanish nurse infected with Ebola may have caught it when she touched her face with a glove after treating a missionary who had the deadly virus, a doctor said Wednesday. Health officials say Teresa Romero twice entered the room of Spanish missionary Manual Garcia Viejo once to clean him and the second time to tidy up after he died on September 25, just days after he was repatriated from Sierra Leone. Doctor German Ramirez of Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital said Romero told him she had touched her face with her gloves as she removed her protective suit after leaving the quarantine room where the missionary was being treated. "It seems like it was the gloves. The gloves touched the face," Ramirez told reporters gathered outside the hospital. "It is possible that this was not a mistake as such. It could simply be an accident and logically, probably, she could not remember at the beginning because of the state of her health." Romero herself said in an interview Wednesday in the online edition of El Pais newspaper that the point when she removed her protective suit was "the most critical moment in which it could have happened, but I am not sure". 'Mistake' or 'accident' Romero's is the first case of Ebola being transmitted outside of West Africa, where an outbreak which began at the start of the year has killed nearly 3,900 people and infected at least twice as many, according to the World Health Organization. Romero was one of five people still in isolation in the hospital on Wednesday. Officials there said another case, a nursing assistant who had been admitted on Tuesday, was discharged after testing negative for Ebola. The Madrid regional health minister Javier Gonzalez said he thought the infection had been due to a "mistake" on the part of the nurse or an "accident". "She has said herself that she probably made a mistake. That reassures us because the safety protocol were observed correctly. If a mistake was made, we will have to find out why," he told reporters. "We are not trying to blame her," he added. "I think it was an accident on the part of the patient." Gonzalez earlier told regional lawmakers in a hearing that Romero had visited her family doctor shortly after feeling ill on September 29 and "concealed from the doctor the fact that she was a nurse who had been in direct contact with a patient infected with Ebola". She then called a medical helpline for hospital staff on October 2 and told them she had a fever, but was not admitted to hospital until October 6. Hairdressers under observation Safety protocol dictated that a fever of 38.6 degrees Celsius (101.5 Fahrenheit) or higher could be a symptom of Ebola, but Gonzalez said the nurse's temperature had never been recorded as having reached that level. "One of the things we have now done is to change the protocol so that anyone with a temperature of a few tenths of a degree will be considered at risk," he said. He rejected claims that medical staff were not adequately trained to treat Ebola patients safely, but admitted that "something clearly did not work" and the safety protocol may have to be "modified" further. Gonzalez said that among the people who were being monitored after coming in contact with the nurse before she was hospitalised were "two hairdressers". "After going to the family doctor she went to the hairdresser to get her legs waxed," he explained. (Ingrid Bazinet, Roland Lloyd Parry)
Spanish health care workers and unions complain of a long list of failings in the case of a nurse who contracted Ebola while treating two elderly missionaries who died from the virus. The nurse, Teresa Romero, the first person to contract Ebola outside Africa in the current outbreak, said Wednesday that she may have been exposed while removing her protective suit at Madrid's La Paz Carlos III hospital when she touched her face with a glove. Inadequate training Staff at the hospital say did not receive enough training on how to safely care for Ebola patients. "Perhaps the most important factor of all is the training, which we feel is very weak," Maximo Gonzalez Jurado, head of Spain's General Nursing Council which regulates the nation's 260,000 nurses, told AFP. Related Articles Spanish Ebola nurse's dog put down despite campaign 08 Oct 2014 Ebola crisis Britain urged to bring in airport screening like US 08 Oct 2014 What next for America's efforts to control Ebola? 08 Oct 2014 Protest over fate of the 'Ebola dog' 08 Oct 2014 How doctors kit up to protect against Ebola 08 Oct 2014 Ebola A time to be vigilant 09 Oct 2014 "When we asked for drills, the Madrid regional health department told us 'we will see'," added the Independent Trade Union of Employees(CSI F) which represents nurses. Santiago Yus, a doctor who was given the job of treating the infected nurse at the La Paz Carlos III hospital, told El Mundo newspaper that he was "not prepared". "I have not received training. And this is the case with many of my colleagues," he said. "They gave us a 20 minute course on how to care for Ebola patients," a nurse at the hospital who asked not to be named told daily newspaper Expansion. Francois Bricaire, the former head of infectious and tropical diseases at the Pitie Salpetriere Hospital in Paris, said people who work with Ebola patients should have training of "at least 48 hours". Red Cross volunteers receive training that extends over an eight year period, he added. Equipment The equipment used by staff to treat the Ebola patients is inadequate and insufficient, according to unions. Staff at the hospital where the nurse worked told El Pais that the protective suits they were given did not meet World Health Organization (WHO) standards, which specify that suits must be impermeable and include breathing apparatus. They pointed to latex gloves secured with adhesive tape as an example of how the suits were not impermeable and noted that they did not have their own breathing equipment. The nurse quoted by Expansion said the protective suits did not seal well and staff resorted to using adhesive tape on the wrists and knees to secure them. She provided photos of the suits. Waste Hospital staff told Spanish media that waste from the rooms of both missionaries were removed in the same elevator used by all personnel and left in the street until a truck arrived to take it to be incinerated. Transportation Before being transported to the La Paz Carlos III hospital, the infected nurse was taken to a hospital in Alcorcon, the southern Madrid hospital where she lives, by ambulance without any special measures, according to a hospital source. The same ambulance then transported other patients, according to Spanish media reports and a hospital source. Management The infected nurse went on leave the day after the death of the second missionary on September 25 and began to feel ill five days later. When she called the La Paz Carlos III hospital where she works, she was told to go her local health centre, according to the CSI F union. "Perhaps the quarantine protocol should have been implemented," the government's health emergencies coordinator Fernando Simon told Cadena Ser radio.
Fear and outrage have gripped Madrid's hospital corridors and spilled out into the streets of the Spanish capital, where two priests died of Ebola last summer. One of their nurses emerged infected. Seven people were being kept in isolation at a hospital in northern Madrid on Thursday, including Teresa Romero Ramos, a 40 year old nursing assistant who tested positive for the deadly virus that has killed thousands in West Africa. Her husband, three coworkers, an emergency room doctor who treated her, and her hairdresser were also in quarantine, some with suspected Ebola symptoms, some without, awaiting tests. More than 50 others were under observation, having their temperatures taken twice daily. Spanish doctors and nurses have been holding daily protests against what they call shoddy safety measures, inadequate quarantine equipment and budget cuts to public health all of which, they say, may have left them vulnerable to the deadly virus. "They need to strengthen safety measures and put more faith in what we are doing, because we did not skip the protocol!" said Esther Quinones, a nurse and union representative who rallied outside her hospital, visibly shaken by the Ebola scare playing out in her profession and across her city. Safety concerns But that protocol may have been inadequate, says one of her colleagues. "Ever since April when we first became aware of Ebola, we've been telling our superiors that we need more information and training," said fellow nurse Ana Maria, who declined to give her surname, out of fear of losing her job for criticizing her superiors. "It's a tough situation, and without information to put our minds at ease, our staff is full of fear, indecision and anxiety." Even regular citizens who live in the same southern Madrid suburb as Romero and her husband have been wearing protective face masks around their neighborhood and to the supermarket, in a sign that panic has set in, even though Ebola is not an airborne virus. "When I see people wearing those masks, and I hear no public advisories from the government, it makes me really scared," said Veronica Blanco, 25, hailing a taxi on a Madrid street corner. "I'm not taking public transport anymore. I try not to touch anyone in the street, or share bottles or utensils with people at work. You just don't know what could happen." Spanish schools remain open public services and business hours are unchanged. Spain's health minister, Ana Mato, has ignored repeated calls for her resignation. But the hashtag AnaMatoDimision "Ana Mato Resignation" in Spanish is trending on Twitter in Spain. "What we have to do is be vigilant but stay calm," Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy told parliament, explaining that Mato still has his backing. "Let the professionals do their job. Have confidence in them. They're some of the best in the world." Messages from quarantine But those professionals failed to identify the first signs of Ebola in Nurse Romero. Suffering from a fever, she was nevertheless sent home from her local hospital with instructions to take paracetamol, before she was later ordered into quarantine. An EMT's report that the patient verbally indicated that she might have Ebola was lost in paperwork and never followed up on. Romero was on vacation from work when she came down with a fever she spent a week in her Madrid neighborhood, before finally being admitted to hospital on Monday. Her dog, with whom she spent time during that week, has been euthanized as a precaution much to the anger of animal rights groups, which organized demonstrations outside Romero's home. One of the emergency room doctors who finally identified Ebola in Romero says the protective suit he was required to wear didn't fit properly. He has now voluntarily checked himself into the quarantine hospital, as a precaution. "The sleeves of the suit were too short for me," Dr. Juan Manuel Parra told a Spanish newspaper by text message from inside his own isolation ward. Romero is believed to have contracted Ebola from Manuel Garcia Viejo, one of two Spanish missionaries evacuated from their posts in West Africa, and repatriated to Spain. Romero was part of the team that treated him in Madrid, where he died on Sept. 25. Five days later, Romero came down with a fever. She entered the infected priest's hospital room just twice, doctors explained one to help change his diaper, and once after his death, to collect some of his clothing. Romero wore a protective suit the entire time. Medical investigators have been interviewing her daily, while in isolation, going over her every move in those days during the priest's treatment. "She told me there's a possibility that she might have inadvertently let part of her protective suit touch her face likely the gloves," said one of the investigators, German Ramirez. Romero is being treated with antibodies from other anonymous Ebola patients. Doctors say she still has a fever, but that they won't announce her condition daily, per the patient's request. On Wednesday, a Spanish newspaper managed to reach her on her mobile phone inside her isolation ward. "I'm better a little better," she said in a weak voice.
Questions are being raised over the inadequate reaction of Spanish health authorities Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy appealed for calm on Wednesday over the case of the nursing auxiliary infected with the Ebola virus. Forty four year old Teresa Romero Ramos was confirmed as the first person to be infected with the virus outside of Africa on Monday after contracting the virus while treating the Spanish missionary Manuel Garcia Viejo in the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid. The case has caused widespread alarm in Spain and Europe. Questions are being raised over why security protocols apparently failed and the inadequate reaction of Spanish health authorities given that Ramos first began to show symptoms of the illness on Sept. 30, but did not enter hospital until Oct. 6. "We are facing a question which is worrying," said Rajoy in his first appearance in Congress since the news broke. Rajoy promised "total transparency to give all of the information that we can give," and said the priority was to "attend to all of those patients and to observe all of those who had contact (with Ramos)." To date, this amounts to a total of over 50 people 22 who work at the Alcorcon hospital Ramos first went to with symptoms of Ebola and a further 30 from the medical teams who worked with her and treated the Ebola patients at the Carlos III Hospital. "We have created a committee to coordinate between the Madrid regional government, the government and the European Union," continued Rajoy, who asked for "professionals to be allowed to work in peace," and calling on people to "keep calm." Health Minister Ana Mato has been singled out for criticism for her handling of the case and was referred to in the debate as "the worst health minister in our history" by Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) deputy Jose Martinez Olmos. Mato said that despite calls for her resignation she was going to "continue to work to guarantee maximum security for the citizens." "The people can have confidence in our professionals to combat this situation," said Mato. PSOE general secretary Pedro Sanchez asked Rajoy to "give guarantees and clarity, explain if there is a risk of infection and to make all possible resources available."
Theresa Romero Ramos, the 40 year old nurse, told Spanish TV station Cuatro that she read on Spanish news site El Pais that she had had two positive tests for Ebola, but that doctors had not told her she was infected. "I felt something was up because to begin with the doctors and nurses in Alcorcon were coming in and out every hour and then they start to come in less often. Javier Limon Romero, the husband of the Spanish nurse with Ebola, started a campaign to stop his dog from being put down "I was listening to them behind the door and I suspected something then the last time they came in my room they were in white suits. "I asked my doctor for my result and they weren't very clear with me, and then I really suspected it," she told the broadcaster. "I go my mobile and I read on El Pais that they'd said I had two positive tests for Ebola. But no one had told me." Mrs Romero Ramos is understood to have contracted Ebola during her contact with Spanish missionary Manuel Garcia Viejo, who died from the disease in September. She entered the missionary's room at the Carlos III hospital while on duty twice once to change an incontinence pad and once to clean up his room after he had died. The nurse's husband, Javier Limon, is also in hospital, and the couple's dog became the centre of protests and an online petition when Mr Limon attempted to halt their pet from being put down by authorities. Mrs Romero Ramos had previously insisted that she "hasn't the slightest idea" how she contracted the virus, and that she followed all safety protocols while in contact with the missionary and his belongings. But she revealed to El Pais on Wednesday that she touched her face after her first visit to the missionary's room while still wearing her gloves, when she was in the process of removing her protective suit. "I think the error was the removal of the suit," she told the paper by telephone. "I can see the moment it may have happened, but I'm not sure about it," referring to when she touched her face. Mrs Romero Ramos went on holiday in Spain after the second of her Ebola patients died on 25 September, and she started to feel ill on 30 September. A demonstrator blocking the road to stop the van transporting infected nurse's dog 'Excalibur' Despite her trade union insisting that she had asked three times to be tested for Ebola before the infection was confirmed on Monday, El Pais claims Mrs Romero Ramos admitted to the paper that she did not tell her doctor she had been in contact with the two Ebola patients. Two hairdressers are now reportedly being monitored for the symptoms after it was discovered that the nurse was in contact with them after seeing her doctor.
The Madrid regional government has not given health personnel enough training to deal with Ebola properly, including the Spanish nurse Teresa Romero, who is now the first person in the world to contract the virus outside Africa, says Juan Carlos Mej as. Romero was in contact with one of two ill Spanish priests who died of the disease in Madrid's Carlos III Hospital. Juan Carlos Mej as is the leader of SATSE, the main trade union in Spain's health sector, representing 100,000 members. Mej as spoke with EurActiv Spain's Fernando Heller. Did the health personnel in the Carlos III Hospital have enough training on Ebola and how to deal with infected patients? Not at all. We just had a 15 minute long training on Ebola. Last April, when we had the first suspected Ebola case in La Paz hospital (Madrid), things started to move very slowly. People from the "disease prevention unit" there gave us a short speech, of around 15 minutes, on how to deal with Ebola cases. That was all. Of course, we complained. But, at least, you got the basic information on the disease, right? For these kind of pathologies, it is not enough to receive some written information, like leaflets or brochures, something that we, by the way, did not have. You need a very complex and specific training. In particular, the use of the protective equipment and the special suits. People need to be trained almost like NASA astronauts! There is a specific protocol to be followed, in particular, the sequence for putting on and removing the equipment. You need almost 45 minutes to take the suit off (one of the most sensitive and dangerous moments, according to the protocol). But we didn't have the right training in the Carlos III Hospital at that time (last April). Ramos said she followed all the appropriate protocols when entering the room of an Ebola patient at Carlos III Hospital, but she acknowledged that she may have made a mistake when removing her protective suit. Do you believe this was a "human error"? I don't want to speculate about that, until we have the final results of the ongoing investigations (with the support of The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control). But in any case, before making any premature conclusions about a possible human error, you need to have solid scientific evidence. It is very easy to blame the health personnel in the first place. What are the next steps? We demand a complete and thorough investigation into the circumstances of the infection. We shall not rest until they (the Spanish health authorities) give us a full explanation of what happened with our colleague. And of course we will continue to demonstrate outside La Paz and Carlos III hospitals, to demand full clarification on how she caught Ebola, and demanding better security measures and training to prevent future cases.
The nurse, 44, has been receiving treatment since Monday at Madrid's Carlos III Hospital, where six other people, including her husband, are being held in quarantine. A doctor, who treated her when she had the first symptoms, was the latest to be admitted to the hospital Thursday. More than 50 other people who had some kind of contact with Romero are under observation in their homes, where they have been told to watch out for fever symptoms. Romero was infected with the virus while taking care of two Spanish missionaries, Manuel Garcia Viejo and Miguel Pajares, who were repatriated last summer to Madrid from Sierra Leone and Liberia, respectively, and who died from the disease. Officials said she entered Garcia Viejo's room twice, once to change a diaper and another time to disinfect the room after the missionary died. She said she probably contracted the virus when she touched her face as she took off her protective suit after leaving the room. The nurse is being treated with an antiviral and the antibodies of a nun who suffered the disease in Liberia and recovered. Ebola spreads through direct contact with blood and bodily fluids of infected persons or animals, causing fever and severe bleeding. Since the outbreak of the disease in West Africa last March, the most virulent known until now, there have been 3,439 known deaths from 7,492 cases, mainly in Guinea Conakry, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Spanish Ebola patient Teresa Romero sensed something was wrong when doctors stopped entering her hospital room and says she learned of her diagnosis in a media report. (Reuters) The health of Ebola stricken Spanish nurse Teresa Romero Ramos worsened on Thursday, and two doctors who treated her were admitted to a hospital for observation. "Her clinical situation has deteriorated but I can't give any more information due to the express wishes of the patient," said Yolanda Fuentes of the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid, according to Reuters. The BBC reported that Ramos "was being helped with her breathing in hospital." Ramos, who became the first case of Ebola transmission outside of Africa, has been hospitalized since Sunday. Tests confirmed Monday that the sanitary technician had contracted Ebola, but Ramos said she only learned of her diagnosis from a media report though she sensed something was wrong when doctors stopped entering her hospital room. It remains unclear exactly how she became infected while treating a priest who had contracted the virus in West Africa, though Ramos acknowledged this week that she may have made a mistake when removing her protective suit. One of the doctors who treated her, Juan Manuel Parra, said in a statement posted to the El Pais Web site that the sleeves on the protective suit he wore while working with Ramos were too short. According to a Bloomberg translation of the statement, Parra said he entered her room more than 12 times. Parra treated Ramos at the Alcorcon hospital, near where the nurse lives in Madrid. She was later transferred to the Carlos III facility where she worked the same hospital that treated two missionaries who were repatriated after becoming infected in Africa. On Wednesday, Ramos told a Spanish newspaper that "the error was the removal of the suit," referring to the protective equipment health care workers wear while treating Ebola patients. Earlier, she had said that she had "no idea" how she contracted the deadly virus. Ramos became infected while treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, a priest who contracted Ebola in West Africa. She entered Viejo's room only twice, once to change his diaper, and a second time to remove his belongings after he died on Sept. 25. Ramos began experiencing Ebola like symptoms on Sept. 30, but was not admitted to the hospital until Sunday, five days later. Ebola spreads from person to person through direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infected person. German Ramirez, a doctor in the Carlos III Hospital's tropical diseases division, told reporters Wednesday that the nurse "has told us of the possibility that her suit had contact with her face. ... It could have been an accident. It looks like it was the gloves." In addition to Ramos and the two doctors who treated her, several other people are under observation in Spain, including her husband, Javier Lim n. One Spanish man who had recently traveled to Nigeria and a nursing aide both tested negative for the virus. A third nursing aide and a nurse were hospitalized with slight fevers on Tuesday night, according to The Wall Street Journal. Family of Ebola victim Thomas Eric Duncan distraught over death in Dallas Spanish case highlights the risks and benefits of repatriating Ebola patients CDC Director on Ebola "That's when I stopped sleeping" Sex in a time of Ebola Travelers from West African countries will face stronger Ebola screening at U.S. airports
The nurse in Madrid who became the first person infected with Ebola outside West Africa repeatedly reported her symptoms to health authorities but was fobbed off with paracetamol before being finally diagnosed with the deadly virus and put in isolation. Maria Teresa Romero Ramos admits she probably caught the virus when she touched her face with a contaminated glove as she removed her protective suit after visiting the room of the infected missionary priest who was repatriated to Madrid from Sierra Leone. Spanish health officials struggled to contain the virus and placed two more nurses in quarantine and dozens of others under observation for symptoms of Ebola. A worldwide campaign to save Romero's dog Excalibur (pictured) did no good health officials announced the pet had been put down and its body incinerated. It emerged Romero was not isolated until six days after she showed signs of the illness and after she had sought medical advice three times. Five days after the priest died, she reported a mild fever and general fatigue but as her temperature had not reached the 38.6C threshold, she was advised to visit her local clinic. Several days later she again contacted health authorities but no action was taken. It was not until Tuesday, when her fever had reached 38.6C, that she was advised to contact her local hospital. Six hours after tests confirmed Ebola, she was transferred in a specialist ambulance to an isolation unit.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone (AP) The number of people infected with Ebola in western Sierra Leone, on the other side of the country from where the first cases emerged months ago, is soaring with more than 20 deaths daily, the government and local media reported Tuesday. New confirmed cases of Ebola that emerged Monday in two Ebola zones in and around the capital Freetown numbered 49, the National Ebola Response Center reported Tuesday. There are 851 total confirmed cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the center said. But there were no new cases in the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun, which previously had been an epicenter of the outbreak. There was no immediate official explanation of what has caused the drop in reported new cases there.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone (AP) The number of people infected with Ebola in western Sierra Leone, on the other side of the country from where the first cases emerged months ago, is soaring with more than 20 deaths daily, the government and local media reported Tuesday. New confirmed cases of Ebola that emerged Monday in two Ebola zones in and around the capital Freetown numbered 49, the National Ebola Response Center reported Tuesday. There are 851 total confirmed cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the center said. But there were no new cases in the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun, which previously had been an epicenter of the outbreak. There was no immediate official explanation of what has caused the drop in reported new cases there. Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone, Dhu AlHijjah 27, 1435, October 21, 2014, SPA The number of people infected with Ebola in western Sierra Leone, on the other side of the country from where the first cases emerged months ago, is soaring with more than 20 deaths daily, the government and local media reported Tuesday, according to AP. New confirmed cases of Ebola that emerged Monday in two Ebola zones in and around the capital Freetown numbered 49, the National Ebola Response Center reported Tuesday. There are 851 total confirmed cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the center said. But there were no new cases in the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun, which previously had been an epicenter of the outbreak. There was no immediate official explanation of what has caused the drop in reported new cases there. SPA 15 01 LOCAL TIME 12 01 GMT
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone (AP) The number of people infected with Ebola in western Sierra Leone, on the other side of the country from where the first cases emerged months ago, is soaring with more than 20 deaths daily, the government and local media reported Tuesday. New confirmed cases of Ebola that emerged Monday in two Ebola zones in and around the capital Freetown numbered 49, the National Ebola Response Center reported Tuesday. There are 851 total confirmed cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the center said. But there were no new cases in the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun, which previously had been an epicenter of the outbreak and where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. There was no immediate official explanation of what has caused the drop in reported new cases in those eastern areas. But Margaret Harris, the World Health Organization's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone, said "Definitely too early to say its been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that due to the increased number of cases in the west authorities quarantine the city of Waterloo, near the capital and located in Western Area Rural. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. The west African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain, and on Tuesday the east African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from all five countries for special treatment. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda said Tuesday that it urges Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said. AP reporters Maria Cheng in London and Edmund Kagire in Kigali, Rwanda contributed to this report.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone (AP) The number of people infected with Ebola in western Sierra Leone, on the other side of the country from where the first cases emerged months ago, is soaring with more than 20 deaths daily, the government and local media reported Tuesday. New confirmed cases of Ebola that emerged Monday in two Ebola zones in and around the capital Freetown numbered 49, the National Ebola Response Center reported Tuesday. There are 851 total confirmed cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the center said. But there were no new cases in the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun, which previously had been an epicenter of the outbreak and where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. There was no immediate official explanation of what has caused the drop in reported new cases in those eastern areas. But Margaret Harris, the World Health Organization's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone, said "Definitely too early to say its been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that due to the increased number of cases in the west authorities quarantine the city of Waterloo, near the capital and located in Western Area Rural. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. The west African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain, and on Tuesday the east African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from all five countries for special treatment. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda said Tuesday that it urges Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said.
You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters By CLARENCE ROY MACAULAY, Associated Press Writer FREETOWN, Sierra Leone The number of people infected with Ebola in western Sierra Leone, on the other side of the country from where the first cases emerged months ago, is soaring with more than 20 deaths daily, the government and local media reported Tuesday. New confirmed cases of Ebola that emerged Monday in two Ebola zones in and around the capital Freetown numbered 49, the National Ebola Response Center reported Tuesday. There are 851 total confirmed cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the center said. But there were no new cases in the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun, which previously had been an epicenter of the outbreak and where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. There was no immediate official explanation of what has caused the drop in reported new cases in those eastern areas. But Margaret Harris, the World Health Organization's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone, said "Definitely too early to say its been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that due to the increased number of cases in the west authorities quarantine the city of Waterloo, near the capital and located in Western Area Rural. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. The west African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain, and on Tuesday the east African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from all five countries for special treatment. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda said Tuesday that it urges Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said. AP reporters Maria Cheng in London and Edmund Kagire in Kigali, Rwanda contributed to this report.
By CLARENCE ROY MACAULAY, Associated Press Writer FREETOWN, Sierra Leone (AP) After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said Tuesday. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The west African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain, and on Tuesday the east African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda on Tuesday urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent."
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone The number of people infected with Ebola in western Sierra Leone, on the other side of the country from where the first cases emerged months ago, is soaring with more than 20 deaths daily, the government and local media reported Tuesday. New confirmed cases of Ebola that emerged Monday in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, Freetown, numbered 49, the National Ebola Response Center reported Tuesday. There are 851 total confirmed cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the center said. But there were no new cases in the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun, which previously had been an epicenter of the outbreak. There was no immediate official explanation of what has caused the drop in reported new cases there.
New confirmed cases of Ebola that emerged Monday in two Ebola zones in and around the capital Freetown numbered 49, the National Ebola Response Center reported Tuesday. There are 851 total confirmed cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the center said. But there were no new cases in the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun, which previously had been an epicenter of the outbreak and where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. There was no immediate official explanation of what has caused the drop in reported new cases in those eastern areas. But Margaret Harris, the World Health Organization's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone, said "Definitely too early to say its been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that due to the increased number of cases in the west authorities quarantine the city of Waterloo, near the capital and located in Western Area Rural. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. The west African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain, and on Tuesday the east African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from all five countries for special treatment. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda said Tuesday that it urges Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said. AP reporters Maria Cheng in London and Edmund Kagire in Kigali, Rwanda contributed to this report.
Freetown The number of people infected with Ebola in western Sierra Leone, on the other side of the country from where the first cases emerged months ago, is soaring with more than 20 deaths daily, the government and local media reported on Tuesday. New confirmed cases of Ebola that emerged on Monday in two Ebola zones in and around the capital Freetown numbered 49, the National Ebola Response Centre reported on Tuesday. There are 851 total confirmed cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the centre said. But there were no new cases in the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun, which previously had been an epicentre of the outbreak and where there have been a total of 1 012 confirmed cases. There was no immediate official explanation of what has caused the drop in reported new cases in those eastern areas. But Margaret Harris, the World Health Organisation's spokesperson in Sierra Leone, said "Definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested on Tuesday that due to the increased number of cases in the west authorities quarantine the city of Waterloo, near the capital and located in Western Area Rural. The World Food Programme over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. Growing fear "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts", the Exclusive newspaper said. The West African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea, where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago, have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4 500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain, and on Tuesday the east African nation of Rwanda was singling out travellers from all five countries for special treatment. A Rwandan ministry of health document says all passengers from the US and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The US embassy in Rwanda said on Tuesday that it urges Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the department of state's bureau of consular affairs nor the US embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a US citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it0", the embassy said.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone (AP) After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said Tuesday. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The west African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain, and on Tuesday the east African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda on Tuesday urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone (AP) After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said Tuesday. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The west African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain, and on Tuesday the east African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda on Tuesday urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said. AP reporters Maria Cheng in London contributed to this report.
Oct. 20, 2014 Health workers bury the body of a woman who is suspected of having died of the Ebola virus in Bomi county, on the outskirts of Monrovia, Liberia. (AP) FREETOWN, Sierra Leone After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said Tuesday. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The west African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain, and on Tuesday the east African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda on Tuesday urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said. No Ebola cases have emerged in Rwanda.
In eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun virus appears to be slowing Dozens of people are being infected with the deadly Ebola virus each day in Sierra Leone, as the terrifying disease tears through the country's capital city, Freetown. Yesterday, forty nine new cases were confirmed in just 24 hours, the National Ebola Response Center (NERC) reported. So many people are succumbing to the deadly virus that removing the dead bodies is becoming a serious problem. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area of the country said that more than 20 deaths are being reported each day. He told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Sierra Leone is one of three West African nations at the epicenter of the worst outbreak of the disease on record. According he latest statistics from the World Health Organization (WHO), the virus has killed more than 4,500 people since first appearing deep in the Guinean forest last December. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural zones, NERC reported. In terms of numbers of cases, the two western zones may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in Sierra Leone the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported yesterday in Kenema and Kailahun but a WHO spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. 'There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials,' said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. 'So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there.' The World Food Program delivered emergency food rations to people in Waterloo over the weekend, as local media reports suggest the western city may also have to be quarantined. 'The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts,' the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of NERC. The center's headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. Although no cases of Ebola have emerged there, the east African nation of Rwanda was today singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. Ebola cases have emerged in both the U.S. and Spain but the virus has been contained. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda has urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries 'to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent'.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said Tuesday. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The west African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain, and on Tuesday the east African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda on Tuesday urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said. No Ebola cases have emerged in Rwanda. AP reporters Maria Cheng in London contributed to this report.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said Tuesday. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defence Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The West African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain. In Guinea on Tuesday, hundreds of residents in the Conakry suburban neighbourhood of Kaporo Rail protested the construction of an Ebola treatment centre nearby. "We don't want the hospital here. They want to infect our neighbourhood," said Binta Sow, the spokesman of the group. Kaporo Rail has a thriving market for ice cream and milk that employs hundreds of women and youth. There were worries this could harm the local economy. "No one will buy anything here if they erect the centre," said a local ice cream vendor. On Tuesday the East African nation of Rwanda was singling out travellers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda on Tuesday urged Americans who may have a fever or who have travelled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone (AP) After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said Tuesday. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The west African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain, and on Tuesday the east African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda on Tuesday urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said. AP reporters Maria Cheng in London contributed to this report. Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said today. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported yesterday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested today that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The West African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain. In Guinea, hundreds of residents in the Conakry suburban neighborhood of Kaporo Rail protested the construction of an Ebola treatment center nearby. "We don't want the hospital here. They want to infect our neighborhood," said Binta Sow, the spokesman of the group. Kaporo Rail has a thriving market for ice cream and milk that employs hundreds of women and youth. There were worries this could harm the local economy. "No one will buy anything here if they erect the center," said a local ice cream vendor. Today the East African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said. No Ebola cases have emerged in Rwanda. AP reporters Maria Cheng in London and Boubacar Diallo in Conakry, Guinea contributed to this report.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone (AP) After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said Tuesday. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The West African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain. In Guinea on Tuesday, hundreds of residents in the Conakry suburban neighborhood of Kaporo Rail protested the construction of an Ebola treatment center nearby. "We don't want the hospital here. They want to infect our neighborhood," said Binta Sow, the spokesman of the group. Kaporo Rail has a thriving market for ice cream and milk that employs hundreds of women and youth. There were worries this could harm the local economy. "No one will buy anything here if they erect the center," said a local ice cream vendor. On Tuesday the East African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda on Tuesday urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said. AP reporters Maria Cheng in London and Boubacar Diallo in Conakry, Guinea contributed to this report. Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said Tuesday. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The West African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain. In Guinea on Tuesday, hundreds of residents in the Conakry suburban neighborhood of Kaporo Rail protested the construction of an Ebola treatment center nearby. "We don't want the hospital here. They want to infect our neighborhood," said Binta Sow, the spokesman of the group. Kaporo Rail has a thriving market for ice cream and milk that employs hundreds of women and youth. There were worries this could harm the local economy. "No one will buy anything here if they erect the center," said a local ice cream vendor. On Tuesday the East African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda on Tuesday urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said Tuesday. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The West African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain. In Guinea on Tuesday, hundreds of residents in the Conakry suburban neighborhood of Kaporo Rail protested the construction of an Ebola treatment center nearby. "We don't want the hospital here. They want to infect our neighborhood," said Binta Sow, the spokesman of the group. Kaporo Rail has a thriving market for ice cream and milk that employs hundreds of women and youth. There were worries this could harm the local economy. "No one will buy anything here if they erect the center," said a local ice cream vendor. On Tuesday the East African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda on Tuesday urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said. No Ebola cases have emerged in Rwanda. AP reporters Maria Cheng in London and Boubacar Diallo in Conakry, Guinea contributed to this report.
Government officials in Sierra Leone estimate that there are around 20 deaths each day from the Ebola outbreak. While countries like Nigeria have been declared Ebola free, Sierra Leone needs extra attention as the outbreak reaches its peak. According to The Guardian, there were 49 new confirmed cases of Ebola on Monday in two Ebola zones around Sierra Leone's capital, Freetown. In total there are 851 confirmed cases within the two zones. Previously the Ebola outbreak was only effecting the eastern side of the country, but there has been a rise in the number of cases in the West recently. The number of cases in the East remains at 1,012 confirmed cases, but officials are concerned that the western part of the country may soon surpass that number. Officials are saying that the rise in the West may be because many people were moving from the interior of the country to Waterloo, which goes right through Freetown. The increased number of cases have led authorities to quarantine Waterloo. Claude Kamanda, a lawmaker, said that there are more than 20 deaths being reported daily. Authorities in the effected areas are struggling to keep up with collecting the bodies of the dead from homes. Because of the rapid increase in the number of cases and deaths, the World Health Organization can only estimate that approximately 4,500 people have died due to the outbreak. Public fear continues to grow with the number of people infected. Officials believe there is no other choice but to quarantine the people in the western part of the country in Waterloo. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone, told the Associated Press. "...It's too early to say we have a real decline. It's definitely too early to say it's been beaten there."
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said today. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested today that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district. The war ended in Freetown a decade later where the final battle was fought. Now the enemy is a disease, and the president is putting in place a more military style response. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. The West African nations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea where the outbreak first emerged 10 months ago have been hit hard by Ebola with more than 4,500 deaths, according to WHO estimates. A few cases have also emerged in the United States and Spain. In Guinea today, hundreds of residents in the Conakry suburban neighborhood of Kaporo Rail protested the construction of an Ebola treatment center nearby. "We don't want the hospital here. They want to infect our neighborhood," said Binta Sow, the spokesman of the group. Kaporo Rail has a thriving market for ice cream and milk that employs hundreds of women and youth. There were worries this could harm the local economy. "No one will buy anything here if they erect the center," said a local ice cream vendor. Today the East African nation of Rwanda was singling out travelers from the U.S. and Spain for special screening. A Rwandan Ministry of Health document says all passengers from the U.S. and Spain will have their temperatures taken upon arrival. If the passenger has a fever he or she is denied entry. If there is no fever, the visitors still must report their health condition daily to authorities. The U.S. Embassy in Rwanda today urged Americans who may have a fever or who have traveled to Ebola countries "to weigh carefully whether travel to Rwanda at this time is prudent." "Please note neither the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs nor the U.S. Embassy have authority over quarantine issues and cannot prevent a U.S. citizen from being quarantined should local health authorities require it," the embassy said.
FREETOWN, Sierra Leone After emerging months ago in eastern Sierra Leone, Ebola is now hitting the western edges of the country where the capital is located with dozens of people falling sick each day, the government said Tuesday. So many people are dying that removing bodies is reportedly a problem. Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo, which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There's a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. A local newspaper suggested that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. President Ernest Bai Koroma last week appointed Defense Minister Alfred Palo Conteh as CEO of the National Ebola Response Center, whose headquarters are being placed at the former War Crimes Tribunal for Sierra Leone in the west end of Freetown together with the U.N. Mission for Ebola Emergency Response.
Freetown Sierra Leone government officials said on Tuesday that Ebola cases were rising in the western section of the country. Over 20 deaths a day have been recorded since the start of the week, and authorities are having problems collecting the corpses. After emerging in the Eastern part of the country several months ago, Ebola has now hit the Western regions of Sierra Leone close to the capital, Freetown. On Monday, 49 deaths were confirmed in two areas around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center (NERC) reported. According to the Associated Press, Lawmaker Claude Kamanda, a representative of one of the western areas said the death roll for the Ebola virus has risen to 20 deaths a day. He also said that authorities were experiencing challenges in collecting the corpses. Authorities are blaming the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior of the country through Waterloo, a gateway to Freetown, as the reason for the sudden sharp rise in the number of Ebola cases. There is strong indication that people are not observing quarantine laws. As a response to the flood of people coming through Waterloo to get to Freetown, the government has quarantined Waterloo. There is a total of 851 confirmed cases in what is called the Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. As the number of cases rises, the two new zones may end up surpassing the earlier epicenter of the outbreak, the districts of Kenema and Kailahun, where 1,012 Ebola cases have been confirmed. The World Health Organization (WHO) reported there had not been any new cases of Ebola in Kenema and Kailahun on Monday. But it is too early to say the disease had burned itself out in the Eastern part of the country. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." People are fearful of the way the Ebola virus is spreading because the route of the disease is reminiscent of the way country rebels crossed the nation in 1991, starting a bloody war in the Kailahun district. The battle ended 10 years later in Freetown. This time, the enemy is a terrible disease, and the government is fighting it using a military response. Last week, President Ernest Bai Koroma appointed his Defense minister, Alfred Palo Conteh, as CEO in charge of the National Ebola Response Center. The response center is now located in the former War Crimes Tribunal building in Freetown along with the U.N. Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. On Tuesday evening, authorities imposed a curfew on the eastern Sierra Leone city of Koidu after a disagreement between police and youth armed with shotguns erupted into violence. The incident centered around a suspected case of Ebola. A local civic leader says he saw at least two bodies with gunshot wounds, but the local police spokesman said no one had been killed. Also on Tuesday, the Rwanda Ministry of Health gave notice that passengers from all five countries affected by the Ebola virus will have their temperatures taken on arrival in the country. Countries affected by the order include Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, the U.S. and Spain. The ministry document says that if passengers have a fever, they will not be admitted into the country.
Forty nine confirmed cases of Ebola emerged in just one day, Monday, in two Ebola zones in and around the capital, the National Ebola Response Center, or NERC, said. Lawmaker Claude Kamanda who represents a western area said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily. Kamanda told the local Politico newspaper that authorities are experiencing challenges collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes. Authorities say the uncontrolled movement of people from the interior to Waterloo which is the gateway to Freetown, the capital, has fueled the increase of Ebola cases in the west. There is a strong feeling that people are violating the quarantines elsewhere and coming to Freetown through Waterloo. There are 851 total confirmed Ebola cases in the two zones, called Western Area Urban and Western Area Rural, the NERC said. In numbers of cases, they may soon surpass a former epicenter of the outbreak in the country, the eastern districts of Kenema and Kailahun where there have been a total of 1,012 confirmed cases. No new cases were reported Monday in Kenema and Kailahun but a World Health Organization spokeswoman said it is too early to declare that the epidemic has burned itself out in the east. "There was a drop in new cases in Kenema and Kailahun and fingers were crossed but there has been a bit of a flare up thanks to a couple of unsafe burials," said Margaret Harris, WHO's spokeswoman in Sierra Leone. "So it's too early to say we have a real decline ... definitely too early to say it's been beaten there." A local newspaper suggested Tuesday that authorities quarantine Waterloo. The World Food Program over the weekend delivered emergency food rations to people there. "The growing fear has left the public with no choice but to call on the Government for Waterloo to be quarantined as was done to other places including Kailahun, Kenema, Bombali, Port Loko and Moyamba Districts," the Exclusive newspaper said. Many residents of the capital note that Ebola has followed the same route across the country as rebels who in 1991 started a savage war in Kailahun district.
President Dr Ernest Bai Koroma on Monday 20th October made a spot visit at the Ebola Burial Command Centre at the British Council Hall in Freetown. The command centre was set up for the overall coordination of the burial team and to have dignified burial management daily operations in Freetown. Explaining the daily incident report on the burial teams, Victoria Parkinson informed the president that Freetown is being divided into five zones. She explained that every call appears on the screen computers of each member in the command centre, and the information will be disseminated to the various zones. She pointed out that the system will help to identify hotspots, the quarantining process and also disinfect homes that are Ebola related. She further stated that the centre will enhance an effective and robust collection of corpses and ensure dignified burials wherein relatives would have the chance to see the process. In this regard, President Koroma said such an outfit should be cascaded to other districts across the country to have an effective coordination of the entire process. The Ebola contact person for the Department for International Development (DFID) Mr. Donal Brown said they were set to target both Bombali and Port Loko districts.
The lethal Ebola virus is spreading rapidly in Western Sierra Leone, and more than 20 people are dying per day as a result. Claude Kamanda, a member of parliament who represents a western district in Sierra Leone, told local newspaper Politico that people are contracting the virus and dying at a rapid rate. He said more than 20 deaths are being reported daily, and authorities are "experiencing challenges in terms of collecting corpses from both quarantined and non quarantined homes," reported Politico on October 21. The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention stated that more Ebola labs are needed in Sierra Leone, the local newspaper also reported that day. According to the National Ebola Response Center (NERC), 49 cases of the deadly virus were confirmed on Monday alone in two zones in and around Freetown, the Sierra Leone capital. At least 851 total cases of Ebola have been confirmed in Western Sierra Leone, and at least 1,012 in the eastern part of the country, the former nexus of the nation's outbreak. Edward Senesie, a western area police inspector, said people were leaving quarantined homes because they did not have food, Politico also reported.
Health officials in Madrid sought to allay fears over Ebola today after announcing that in addition to the nurse who was reported on Monday night to have contracted the disease, three people are in quarantine because of potential contagion and a further 52 are being monitored. Late on Monday it was revealed that a 40 year old nurse who helped to care for one of the two Spanish missionaries who died of Ebola after being flown back to Spain for treatment earlier this year, is the first case of transmission outside West Africa in the current outbreak of the disease. The three now in quarantine in northern Madrid's Carlos III hospital are the nurse's husband, a man who recently travelled to Spain from Nigeria and one of the nurse's co workers. It was reported last night that the nurse's colleague had tested negative for the disease. A fifth individual, a doctor, was tested for Ebola overnight on Monday but was quickly given the all clear. Spain's Public Health Director, Mercedes Vinuesa, said that officials were drawing up a list of people who may have had contact with the as yet unnamed nurse. After being moved to the Carlos III very early yesterday morning, she is now being treated with antibodies from previously infected survivors of the disease. She is said to be in a stable condition. The Spanish nurse infected by Ebola is moved by ambulance in Alcorcon, Spain (Getty) The 52 further individuals being monitored are all medical staff who either treated the nurse in the hospital in Alcorc n a large town south west of Madrid where she was originally admitted or at the Carlos III. While the search for further individuals who had come into contact with the nurse continues, it has been confirmed that despite beginning a holiday on 25 September, the nurse did not leave her home near Madrid. After sitting for an exam for an internal promotion during her time off work, the nurse began feeling unwell on about 30 September, suffering from a fever, before being diagnosed with Ebola on Monday. The European Commission has sent a letter asking for clarification how she actually became infected, and yesterday the Spanish government came under domestic pressure to explain how the nurse had contracted the virus. Members of opposition parties called for the resignation of the Health Minister, Ana Mato a demand echoed by health workers protesting outside one hospital in Madrid yesterday and for the minister to make a full statement on the case in Parliament. "The management of our health service has failed," Gaspar Llamazares, an MP for the hard left Izquierda Unida coalition, claimed. Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato during a meeting on Ebola in Madrid on Tuesday (EPA) Members of one health workers' trade union, meanwhile, argued that the protection suits that they used while handling Ebola cases were not of the maximum standard possible and that they believe Carlos III's infrastructure for handling such diseases had suffered from recent cutbacks. An investigation has now opened into exactly how the nurse, reported to have 15 years' experience as a health worker, caught Ebola despite all the precautions. Contacted by phone by the newspaper El Mundo today while in quarantine, the nurse's husband said that she was progressing favourably. He also claimed that she "did everything she had been told to" regarding medical protocol while treating the Ebola victim.
Brussels has said it will investigate procedures at a Spanish hospital where Ebola was transmitted from a patient. Contacts of the infected nurse are being monitored for signs of the deadly disease. European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent said Spanish health authorities would give regular updates about how a Spanish nurse came to contract Ebola from a patient. A special meeting of the EU's Health Security Committee is set to take place in Brussels on Wednesday. "Our priority... is to know exactly what happened," said Vincent, adding that the hospital in question was supposed to "respect all the rules which are very strict aimed at avoiding this type of contamination." Wednesday's meeting will see representatives of EU member states briefed by health experts, including those from the World Health Organization and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. The European Commission on Monday sent a letter to the Spanish Health Minister "to obtain some clarification" about what had happened. While Spanish authorities claim they are still not certain how the virus was allowed to spread, medical staff unions have complained that staff were not adequately trained. The head of Madrid's Carlos III hospital, Rafael Perez Santamaria, said experts were "revising our protocols." Spanish officials say the nurse began to feel ill on September 30 while she was on leave after treating Spanish priests Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia Viejo. Both men were repatriated from Sierra Leone and later died. The nurse is believed to have been the first person to have contracted the disease outside Africa. Risk of naivety Spanish officials said they are monitoring 52 people mostly health staff who came into contact with the nurse before she was isolated on Monday. "It would be very naive to think that there is no possibility of contagion," Spain's health emergencies coordinator Fernando Simon told Spanish radio station Cadena Ser. The Madrid regional government on Tuesday obtained a court order to euthanize the nurse's dog, saying "available scientific information" could not rule out a risk of the animal spreading the virus. In all, nearly 7,500 people have been infected with the Ebola virus in West Africa, with more than 3,400 deaths in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, which are at the centre of the epidemic. In Dallas, Texas, health officials are also monitoring the health of 48 people who may have had contact with Ebola patient Thomas Duncan, the first person to have been diagnosed with the disease outside Africa. rc jm (AFP, AP, dpa, Reuters)
Spanish health authorities reacted forcefully today after a nurse's aide was found to have contracted Ebola, putting her in an isolation unit, quarantining her husband and two other people, and getting a court order to euthanize her dog. The case marked the first time the disease has been contracted outside of west Africa and has alarmed health workers throughout Europe. The European Union has demanded an explanation from Spain as to how the health worker could have become infected. "Tomorrow morning, we will have an audio conference call of EU's Health Security Committee," said Frederic Vincent, a spokesman for European Health Commission. "We will all listen very carefully to what the Spanish officials have to tell us on why was the hospital not ready for Ebola patients." The response by Madrid raised the specter that pets could spread the disease. The city of Madrid got a court order to euthanize and incinerate the woman's dog over her and her husband's objections, according to the Associated Press. The dog is a mixed breed pooch named Excalibur. The government said available scientific knowledge suggests a risk that the dog could transmit the virus to humans. Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a news conference today, "We have not identified this as means of transmission," but declined to comment on the actions by Madrid officials. Texas health commissioner David Lakey, who has said they are monitoring about 50 people who had contact with the Ebola patient in Dallas, said, "We are not monitoring any animals at this time." The Spanish patient, who has not been publicly identified, worked as the equivalent of a nurse's aide at Madrid's Carlos III hospital. She was part of a team that treated two Ebola patients who were repatriated from West Africa after contracting the disease. The medical team treated a missionary Miguel Pajares, 75, who was repatriated home from Liberia in August and died five days later. The same team took care of Mario Garcia Viejo, 69, a Spanish missionary who got infected in Sierra Leone and was flown to Madrid for treatment four days before he died on Sept. 25. Texas Ebola Patient Thomas Eric Duncan Now Getting Experimental Drug What to Know About the Experimental Drug Being Given to the Texas Ebola Patient US Journalist With Ebola Leaves Liberia to Be Treated in Nebraska The woman, 44, had contact with Viejo twice. Once when he was still alive and she had to change his diapers, and a second time after he died and she had to take out his sheets, clothing and bodily wastes, public health official said. She went on holiday after Viejo's death, although officials insist she never left Madrid. Officials said the woman wasn't feeling well for a week before she was admitted to the isolation unit. El Mundo daily reported that it was the nurse who asked repeatedly to be tested for Ebola, before it was done on Monday. Since her disease was diagnosed, her husband, who has no sign of disease, and two more people including a colleague who treated Viejo are being monitored in the hospital in a bid to try to stop the spread of the deadly virus. In addition, health authorities said they are monitoring more than 50 possible contacts of the nurse's aide. The team has a strict safety protocol in place, which includes double impregnated gown, gloves, masks and protective eye glasses, according to health officials. "We are investigating how she got contaminated and if protocols were respected," said Rosa Serrano, an official with Spanish health ministry. Staff at the hospital told El Pais daily that the protective gowns they were using did not meet World Health Organization criteria, which require them to be impermeable and have a breathing equipment. Staff also complained about low quality latex gloves. Spain was the first European country to repatriate home infected patients for treatment. Some health professionals said that Spanish hospitals were not well equipped to handle Ebola patients. "For instance in the U.S. there are 10 hospitals with level 4 isolation and here only Carlos III with level 2 and level 3," says Pedro Martinez of AMYTS, the union representing doctors. Despite the situation in Spain, European Health Commission thinks that a European Ebola epidemic "is very unlikely, and that in some way it could be a lesson for other member states," Vincent said.
A Spanish medical worker has tested positive for Ebola in what is suspected as the first transmission of the disease outside West Africa since the current outbreak began. Photo AP The husband and a co worker of a Spanish nurse's aide who was infected with Ebola in Madrid have been placed in quarantine, officials said Tuesday, as authorities struggled to address international concern over further contagion in the country and beyond. Health officials maintained that all appropriate safety measures were taken in the special Ebola ward where the woman worked. But several nurses who work in the isolation unit said some of the special gear they were provided was inadequate, with one describing having to duct tape her protective clothing to her wrists. More Fate of Nurse's Aide's Dog Sparks Outcry in Spain Health Care Workers Face Ebola Risks How Liberian Farm Became Ebola Sanctuary Spain's medical community and some of its 47 million people reacted with alarm to the first suspected case of transmission outside West Africa. The country's stock market fell as airline and hotel shares took a beating. The Spanish case, along with that of a Liberian man who became ill in Dallas last week after arriving from his home country, has raised concern about weaknesses in developed countries' medical defenses. Hospital officials said Tuesday afternoon that the man, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical, but stable condition. Six Ebola patients have been cared for in U.S. hospitals since the West African outbreak began. The European Union said it had asked Madrid for more details of how the aide had contracted the disease. Ten Ebola patients have been evacuated to European countries so far, according to EU health officials eight to EU countries and one each to Norway and Switzerland. Health care workers called for Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato to resign at a demonstration outside Madrid's La Paz Hospital on Tuesday. Reuters Officials in Norway, France and Germany said they were confident of their own procedures. The World Health Organization's regional director for Europe stressed that the bloc's countries, including Spain, are still considered at low risk for Ebola. Other such isolated cases may occur on the Continent in the coming months as countries there bring home infected citizens from Africa to treat them, Zsuszanna Jakab said. "The preparedness in the EU is very good, probably the best in the world against hemorrhagic fever, including Ebola," Dr. Jakab said. They have lab facilities to test for the virus, isolation wards and trained staff to care for patients and arrangements to trace backward how an Ebola patient came to have contact with the virus. The EU activated its Early Warning and Response System, a confidential computer network that allows the bloc's members to share information on a disease outbreak and coordinate a response. The Ebola outbreak this year has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, according to the WHO, and has become a mounting concern to the rest of the world. It has taken a high toll among health care workers, sickening or killing more than 370 in Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone, the hardest hit countries. The Spanish medical worker tested positive after working with a Sierra Leone based missionary who had contracted the disease and was flown to Madrid for treatment. Officials said she complained of mild fever and weakness on Sept. 30, five days after his death, and was isolated on Monday, almost a week later, at a suburban hospital outside Madrid. It isn't clear how long she would have been infectious. Mercedes Vinuesa, Spain's public health director, said officials were monitoring the 29 other members of the medical team and 22 other people she came in contact with since late September. "Every recommendation by the World Health Organization is being followed," Ms. Vinuesa told a parliamentary commission Tuesday. "It must be clear that well implemented safety measures provide a very high security margin" against Ebola infection. The hashtag VamosAMorirTodos "We Are All Going to Die" in Spanish was trending among Twitter users in Spain, according to Trendsmap, a company that tracks popular hashtags on the social media site. An ambulance carrying a Spanish nurse who has contracted Ebola arrives at the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid early Tuesday. Reuters Javier Barrio, an analyst with BPI, said concerns about the economic impact of a larger outbreak are weighing on Spain's stock market. "It's not simply that tourism might be hurt, but also that people may prefer to stay home and stop consuming," he said. Spanish officials said they were investigating how the nurse's aide would have contracted Ebola. Carlos III Hospital, where she worked, was equipped with gloves, gowns, masks, goggles and other gear meant to protect against bodily fluids, which spread the disease. But several nurses who work in the hospital's sixth floor isolation unit said some of the gear was inadequate. One said the yellow coveralls she was issued sometimes failed to loop around her thumbs to keep the sleeves from bunching up and exposing her forearm, so she fixed them to her wrists with duct tape. Another medical worker at the isolation unit said training to handle Ebola patients had been "scarce, and at the last minute." In August, just before the first patient arrived, the hospital called in staff to explain how to put on and remove protective gear, she said. Many who, like herself, were on vacation were later briefed by colleagues but got no formal training, she said. Ms. Vinuesa said the nurse's aide had been moved early Tuesday from the suburban hospital to Carlos III. Officials said her husband was also quarantined there and was being tested, along with a nurse who had treated the missionary. Officials later said the nurse had tested negative for Ebola but remained under quarantine. They didn't say whether the husband had symptoms of Ebola. Doctors were also testing a third quarantined person, a man who returned from a trip to Nigeria with a fever, officials said. They said he had tested negative for Ebola and was awaiting a second test. His nationality wasn't clear. Colleagues identified the infected nurse's aide only by her first name, Teresa, a 44 year old married woman with no children and 14 years on the job. She was one of 30 medical personnel who treated Brother Manuel Garc a Viejo in September and another Spanish missionary, the Rev. Miguel Pajares, who died of Ebola in August after being brought home from Liberia. Colleagues said the nurse's aide had washed Brother Garc a Viejo's body once, changed his diaper and took his temperature while he was alive, and spent an hour cleaning his room the night after his death. She then took time off to take an exam, with the aim of upgrading her temporary contract to a permanent one, but followed the required precautions as soon as she noticed a mild fever, her colleagues said. She checked in with medical staff at a different Madrid hospital but was sent home because her fever didn't exceed 101.48 degrees Fahrenheit, the temperature that would set in motion the protocol to test for Ebola, said Elvira Gonz lez, head of Spain's Nursing Aides Union. The infected worker then checked in with her primary health care physician, who gave her Paracetamol, a common pain reliever, to treat her fever. Then she summoned an ambulance to her home, but her fever still wasn't high enough. "She went to these health professionals basically giving them a prediagnosis," and alerting them that she had worked with an Ebola patient, Ms. Gonz lez said. She also had spots on her skin, Ms. Gonz lez said. A rash is a symptom of Ebola, according to the WHO. As the fever persisted, her colleagues said, the infected woman started sleeping in a separate bedroom and using a different bathroom from those of her husband. She was finally hospitalized and tested after her fever spiked. "It's intimidating," she told nursing colleagues on a WhatsApp chat group after being diagnosed with Ebola. "I'm really scared." Spanish officials said on Tuesday that she was responding well to an experimental Ebola treatment based on antibodies from the bloodstream of an African nun who survived the illness. They said she had a mild fever. Her nursing colleagues said she had suffered vomiting and diarrhea on Monday but those symptoms had subsided. Infectious disease experts said that more about how the transmission happened must be known before it is clear whether any changes in protective procedures are necessary. However, experts agree that the transmission likely was related to human practice rather than the virus itself mutating to become more infectious. For instance, it can be difficult to get out of protective contamination suits, so there could have been a breach during that process. Francisco George, Portugal's top health official, said he suspected the protective gear worn by the Spanish nurse's aide was faulty. Portugal, which hasn't treated Ebola cases, was looking into its own medical protocols for the disease, he said. On Tuesday, a Norwegian who had been working for Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone was flown to Oslo in a special jet for treatment in a hospital unit that handles chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear and explosive agents. Health care workers in yellow protection suits met the patient at the airport. "All patient treatment comes with a certain risk if you break routines," said Espen Nakstad, head of the National CBRNe Medical and Advisory Center, the unit treating the patient. "I don't know what happened in Spain, but if you have good routines and safety equipment, you should be safe." Ilan Brat, Jeannette Neumann, Carlos Lopez Perea, Nicholas Winning, Kjetil Malkenes Hovland and Betsy McKay contributed to this article. Write to Christopher Bjork at christopher.bjork wsj.com and Shirley S. Wang at shirley.wang wsj.com
The nurse caught the infection while treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, a priest who contracted the virus in West Africa. People have raised concerns that the protective suits used by workers treating Ebola patients at the facility are not adequate. European Union officials have asked Health Minister Ana Mato for clarification about how the nurse became infected MADRID Spain has reported the first case of Ebola transmission outside of West Africa as a nurse at a Spanish hospital contracted the virus and three more people, including her husband, were placed under quarantine for Ebola at the Madrid hospital. The transmission has raised questions whether sufficient protocols were in place to protect health workers at the Carlos III Hospital where the nurse caught the infection while treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, a priest who contracted the virus in West Africa. Health workers at the Carlos III Hospital protested on Tuesday. Others have raised concerns that the protective suits used by workers treating Ebola patients at the facility are not adequate. Health care workers said they had not received proper training or equipment to handle an Ebola case. Opposition politicians have called for the health minister, Ana Mato, to resign. European Union officials have asked Mato for clarification about how the nurse became infected even though all EU member states were required to take measures to avoid transmission. "There is obviously a problem somewhere," European Commission spokesman Frdric Vincent said, according to the Guardian. The European Commission is the executive arm of the European Union. According to reports, the nurse, a sanitary technician, had entered priest Garcia Viejo's room only twice. In one case, she entered the room to change his diaper and another time, after he had died, she entered to collect his belongings, according to Mercedes Vinuesa Sebastian, Spain's public health director. Both times, the nurse wore personal protective equipment. Spanish officials said they are investigating what went wrong. "We are working to verify the exact source of contact to see if all strict protocols were followed," Health Minister Ana Mato said at a news conference, according to NBC News. According to the Spanish newspaper El Pais, hospital staff members told the paper that the protective equipment was not completely impermeable. The workers also said that the suits did not allow for autonomous breathing. Hospital officials denied that World Health Organization recommendations were not followed in the treatment of both Garcia Viejo and another Spanish priest, 75 year old Miguel Pajares, who died of Ebola after being flown from West Africa to Spain, where he received the experimental drug ZMapp. "The suits used perfectly meet protocol, as well as the mandatory protection requirements for this disease," said Yolanda Fuentes, the deputy director of Carlos III hospital, according to El Pais. The nurse's aide was moved early Tuesday from a suburban hospital to Carlos III. Officials said the nurse's husband was also quarantined there. The officials didn't say whether the husband had symptoms of Ebola. They said the other nurse had a case of diarrhea, but no fever, a symptom of Ebola. The hospital is also monitoring about 50 people who were believed to have come into contact with the nurse. Doctors were also testing a third quarantined person, a man who returned from a trip to Nigeria with a fever, officials said. They said the traveler had tested negative for Ebola and was awaiting a second test. His nationality wasn't clear. The nurse's aide had washed Brother Garca Viejo's body once, changed his diaper and took his temperature while he was alive, and spent an hour cleaning his room the night after his death. On Tuesday, a Norwegian working for Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone was flown to Oslo in a special jet for treatment in a hospital unit that handles chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear and explosive agents.
Doctors in Madrid have been testing three people for Ebola after a Spanish nurse became the first person known to have contracted the deadly virus outside West Africa. Some 52 others are being monitored, health officials say. The nurse, identified in media reports as Teresa Romero, had treated two Spanish missionaries who died of Ebola after being repatriated. Some 3,400 people have died in the current outbreak. Most of the deaths have been in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has warned of the dire consequences for the economies in the region if the virus continues to spread. Meanwhile the chairman of the World Health Organisation's Ebola science group says he is not surprised that the Spanish nurse contracted the disease. Speaking in Geneva, Prof Peter Piot said he expected more cases among medical staff, even in developed countries, and that the slightest mistake during the care of Ebola patients could be fatal. Reports said one of three people hospitalised in Madrid after the nurse's diagnosis tested negative for the virus on Tuesday. A female health worker, who also treated one of the Spanish priests, has been cleared in two separate tests, health sources say. The husband of the afflicted nurse and a Spanish man who travelled to Spain from Nigeria remain in quarantine. The European Commission has asked Spain to explain how Ms Romero, a 40 year old auxiliary nurse, could have become infected. A hospital investigation is under way. She was one of about 30 staff at the Carlos III hospital in Madrid who had been treating priests Manuel Garcia Viejo and Miguel Pajares, officials say. Mr Garcia Viejo, 69, died at the hospital on 25 September after catching Ebola in Sierra Leone. Mr Pajares, 75, died in August after contracting the virus in Liberia. Ms Romero had twice gone into the room where Mr Garcia Viejo had been treated, to be directly involved in his care and to disinfect the room after his death. Madrid healthcare director Antonia Alemany said "The nurse went into the room wearing the individual protection gear and there's no knowledge of an accidental exposure to risk." Shortly afterwards she went on holiday but fell ill on 30 September and was admitted to Alcorcon hospital in south west Madrid. It was not clear where she went on holiday. Early on Tuesday Ms Romero was moved under police escort to Carlos III hospital in the capital and is said to be in a stable condition. The Spanish health authorities say she is being treated with a drip using antibodies from previous Ebola patients. Doctors are monitoring 22 people including relatives and staff who had contact with the nurse at Alcorcon hospital, as well as 30 people working at Carlos III hospital. All have been contacted by the health authorities. The Carlos III hospital was reported to have had extreme protective measures in place including two sets of overalls, gloves and goggles. However, health workers told El Pais newspaper that the clothing did not have level four biological security, which is fully waterproof and with independent breathing apparatus. Instead it was level two, the paper says, as photographs provided by staff indicated that the overalls did not allow for ventilation and the gloves were made of latex and bound with adhesive tape. Health staff in Madrid protested over alleged safety failures on Tuesday. Patients should be isolated ideally in a hospital with the highest level of bio safety. Such a facility would use a specially designed tent with controlled ventilation to house the patient's bed this allows staff to provide clinical care while containing the infection. Staff treating the patient must wear protective suits, gloves, masks and goggles. This equipment should be completely impermeable since Ebola is spread in bodily fluids such as sweat, urine and blood Any clinical waste such as syringes, paper towels or clothing from the patient should be incinerated. A dedicated laboratory should be used to carry out any necessary tests. IMF official Rupa Duttagupta said on Tuesday that a generally positive outlook for growth in sub Saharan Africa was overshadowed by what she described as "the heavy economic toll" on countries worst affected by Ebola. In other developments Ebola spreads through contact with bodily fluids and the only way to stop an outbreak is to isolate those who are infected. There have been nearly 7,500 confirmed infections worldwide, with officials saying the figure is likely to be much higher in reality. Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia have been hardest hit. Thomas Duncan, the first person to be diagnosed with Ebola in the US, is being treated at a Dallas hospital. He caught the virus in his native Liberia. Doctors say he is in a critical but stable condition.
A prominent World Health Organisation official has warned that more Ebola cases can be expected among medical staff even in developed countries with modern health care systems. Professor Peter Piot said that he was not surprised that a Spanish nurse had contracted the disease. The nurse has become the first person known to have contracted the deadly virus outside West Africa. She treated two Spanish missionaries who died of Ebola in Madrid. The nurse, identified in media reports as Teresa Romero, looked after the pair after they were repatriated from West Africa. She remains in quarantine in the Spanish capital with her husband and 50 other people in Spain are being monitored. Some 3,400 people have died in the current outbreak. Most of the deaths have been in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. The BBC's Imogen Foulkes in Geneva says that from the start of the Ebola epidemic, the World Health Organisation (WHO) has emphasised the impoverished health care systems of the countries hardest hit Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone. Its experts have insisted that modern hospitals with rigorous disease control measures would prevent infection but our correspondent says that the case of the Madrid nurse proves that is far more difficult than many thought. Professor Piot, a world specialist in Ebola now brought in by the WHO as a scientific advisor, warned that even the simplest movement, like rubbing your eyes, is a risk. "The smallest mistake can be fatal," he said. "For example, a very dangerous moment is when you come out of the isolation unit you take off your protective gear, you are full of sweat and so on and you take off your glasses and do like this and that can be the end." Professor Piot said that he was not surprised by the case of the nurse in Madrid and expects more cases in Europe and the US, although he does not expect to see the illness spread as rapidly as it has in Africa. Meanwhile the US military is stepping up its efforts to respond to the Ebola outbreak in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. Liberia's ambassador to the US, Jeremiah Sulunteh, told the BBC more treatment centres and ambulances were desperately needed. "Currently we need about 27 Ebola treatment centres," he said, but "I think we have got less than 10. "We need some logistical support ambulances to take people from the communities, rural communities to the treatment centres. All of these things we need." Ambassador Sulunteh said that the virus was hitting a country struggling to recover from 14 years of civil war and where there were about 700,000 people for every medical doctor. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has warned of dire consequences for the economies in the region if the virus continues to spread. The European Commission has asked Spain to explain how Ms Romero, a 40 year old auxiliary nurse, could have become infected. A hospital investigation is under way. She was one of about 30 staff at the Carlos III hospital in Madrid who had been treating priests Manuel Garcia Viejo and Miguel Pajares, officials say. Mr Garcia Viejo, 69, died at the hospital on 25 September after catching Ebola in Sierra Leone. Mr Pajares, 75, died in August after contracting the virus in Liberia. Ms Romero had twice gone into the room where Mr Garcia Viejo had been treated, to be directly involved in his care and to disinfect the room after his death. Madrid healthcare director Antonia Alemany said "The nurse went into the room wearing the individual protection gear and there's no knowledge of an accidental exposure to risk." The Carlos III hospital in Madrid was reported to have had extreme protective measures in place including two sets of overalls, gloves and goggles. However, health workers told El Pais newspaper that the clothing did not have level four biological security, which is fully waterproof and with independent breathing apparatus. Health staff in Madrid protested over alleged safety failures on Tuesday. Ebola spreads through contact with bodily fluids and the only way to stop an outbreak is to isolate those who are infected. There have been nearly 7,500 confirmed infections worldwide, with officials saying the figure is likely to be much higher in reality.
Another patient probably infected with the Ebola virus was admitted to the Carlos III hospital in Madrid, Spanish healthcare bodies said Wednesday. The talk is about a nurse who took part in transportation to Spain from Africa of Spanish priests Miguel Pajares and Manuel Garcia Viejo who later died. According to Spanish doctors, "the nurse has a slight rise in temperature, which is not an attribute of a disease caused by the Ebola virus, but specialists said it is expedient to isolate her". So, besides the new patient, nurse Maria Teresa Romero, her husband, as well as a Spanish engineer who recently returned from Nigeria and another nurse are in the hospital now. Tests taken from the latter two Tuesday did not show the presence of the Ebola virus. Pajares working in Liberia was the first Spaniard infected with the virus. He died on August 12. Viejo was the second Spanish national to contract Ebola as he worked as chief medical officer of a hospital in the town of Lunsar in Sierra Leone. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the death toll from the Ebola virus outbreak has exceeded 3,500 people out of a total of 7,500 officially registered cases. The Ebola virus disease (EVD), previously known as the Ebola hemorrhagic fever, is a severe illness in humans, often fatal, according to the WHO website. The virus is passed on to people from wild animals and can be transmitted from humans to humans. The average EVD case death rate is some 50 percent. The first outbreaks of the EVD occurred in remote Central African villages, near tropical rainforests. However, major urban and rural areas have been involved in the most recent outbreak in western Africa. Early supportive care, which includes rehydration and symptomatic treatment, improves the survival rate. No licensed treatment has yet been proven to be able to neutralize the virus but a number of blood, immunological and drug medications are under development. There are no licensed Ebola vaccines yet but two candidates are being evaluated. ITAR TASS
A nurse's assistant in Spain has tested positive for Ebola, making her the first to contract the disease outside of Africa. The Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato announced Monday the 44 year old woman tested positive for Ebola in two separate tests. Her name has not yet been released. Spanish newspaper El Pais reported the patient was admitted to a hospital with a high fever. Further details on her condition have not yet been announced. She reportedly contracted the disease while helping treat a Spanish priest who contracted Ebola in West Africa and was sent home for treatment. That man died late last month. The Telegraph quotes a Spanish health official who says, "All measures have been taken to give the best care to the patient, and guarantee the safety of all citizens." All 30 members of the team that treated the Spanish priest are now being monitored, and officials are tracking down anyone else who might have come in contact with the infected nurse's assistant. There have been approximately 7,500 confirmed cases of Ebola worldwide, with the West African countries of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia being hit the hardest. It's estimated 3,400 people have died during the outbreak so far. This video includes images from Getty Images.
Hospital staff members walk back into the Carlos III hospital in Madrid, Spain, on Tuesday. Associated Press The Ebola infection of a Spanish nurse's aide, the first suspected transmission outside West Africa, is part of a chain of illness in health workers dating back to the early days of the outbreak in rural Guinea in December. Hospital staff in West Africa who had never dealt with the virus took too few precautions when feverish patients began to show up in their waiting rooms. But even health care workers who have taken precautions, as officials say the Spanish nurse's aide did, have fallen ill, in part because of the elaborate protocol involved in treating Ebola patients. By the time Ebola patients arrive on a hospital bed, many are near death and at their most infectious Manuel Garc a Viejo, the Spanish missionary with whom the Spanish health worker came into contact, died days after being flown to Madrid. At that stage, bodily fluids are teeming with the virus. The bulk of available evidence suggests that basic infection control measures like protective gear that eliminate contact with the skin or fluids are sufficient to contain transmission. High tech isolation units, such as the negative pressure chambers used in the few cases in the U.S. and U.K., aren't necessary to containing the virus since the outbreak has been successfully controlled in Nigeria and Senegal, said Malik Peiris, a virology professor in the school of public health at the University of Hong Kong. But a single lapse in procedure removing successive layers of surgical gloves in the wrong order, for example can expose a nurse or doctor to infection. "It's clear that something has gone wrong either in the direct exposure of the patient to an unprotected health care worker or in the practices the health care worker was using," said David J. Evans, professor of virology at the University of Warwick in the U.K., on the Spanish case. In September, a French medic working with Doctors Without Borders contracted the virus while working in the first aid agency's jam packed clinic on the outskirts of Liberia's capital of Monrovia. Scores of health care workers have fallen ill as the number of cases rises. Sierra Leone in particular has seen a spike in cases in the past week, as the virus begins to work its way through the crowded capital of Freetown, where families live together in tin roof homes packed side by side onto a hillside. Five people are infected in the country every hour, the British charity Save the Children said last week. On Sunday, the Sierra Leone government said 121 people had died over the weekend, a jump in cases focused in the lush, beachside sprawl of Freetown, which had begun to attract tourists before the outbreak. "We are having hot spots all around the city," said Abdulai Baratay, a government spokesman. The country needs 1,000 beds for Ebola patients and staff to operate them right now, he added, but neither the government nor the international aid groups can keep up and qualified health workers are scarce. "Honestly, that is our frustration," he said. "For now, we are just hearing about promises. We need people on the ground." Write to Drew Hinshaw at drew.hinshaw wsj.com and Shirley S. Wang at shirley.wang wsj.com
A Spanish medical worker has tested positive for Ebola in what is suspected as the first transmission of the disease outside West Africa since the current outbreak began. Photo AP MADRID A Spanish medical worker tested positive for Ebola after treating an Africa based missionary who had been infected with the virus and flown to Madrid, officials said Monday, reporting the first suspected transmission outside West Africa. Spanish medical worker representatives expressed alarm over the case, saying it raised questions over the adequacy of the country's medical procedures for treating Ebola patients and preventing the spread of the disease in the country and beyond. The female medical worker was infected while working at Madrid's Carlos III hospital, which had been specially prepared to treat the disease. Spanish officials sought to play down any sense of crisis but said they were unable to explain what went wrong. (More Dallas Ebola Patient Receiving Chimerix Experimental Drug) "We're investigating what was the source of the contact, verifying if all the established protocols were followed to the letter," Ana Mato, Spain's health minister, told a televised news conference. "Rest assured that we are taking all measures to guarantee the best medical care for the patient and the safety of the medical staff and the wider population," she added. The infected medical worker, whose name wasn't disclosed, was part of a team that treated Brother Manuel Garc a Viejo, a 69 year old Spanish missionary, before he died of Ebola on Sept. 25. He had been flown to Madrid three days earlier from Sierra Leone, where he served as medical director of a hospital. More U.S. Weighing Additional Passenger Screenings for Ebola Texas Governor Calls for Added U.S. Screening Dallas Mayor No Ebola Symptoms Among Residents U.S. Journalist With Ebola Arrives in Nebraska Liberian Rubber Farm Becomes Sanctuary Against Ebola Norwegian Aid Worker Contracts Ebola in Sierra Leone Related Videos As Spain reports the first case of ebola contracted outside of West Africa, how can the disease be stopped from spreading? UPMC infectious disease expert Dr. Amesh Adalja joins the News Hub. Photo Getty. Ebola is a highly contagious virus, but only if you come into contact with certain bodily fluids of those infected. What do scientists know about how it's transmitted? WSJ's Jason Bellini has TheShortAnswer. Bodily fluids present an infection risk to medical workers treating patients with ebola. What gear do they wear? WSJ's Jason Bellini has TheShortAnswer. Health officials said the infected medical worker had been in contact once with Brother Garc a Viejo while he was alive and with his clothes after he died. She registered a slight fever on Sept. 30, health officials said, and was admitted to a suburban Madrid hospital on Sunday. The infection was confirmed by two tests, the second one on Monday, they said. Antonio Alemany, director of primary health care in the Madrid region, said the medical worker was in a stable condition and running a fever that hasn't surpassed 101.48 degrees Fahrenheit. She was kept in isolation at the suburban facility, Mr. Alemany said at the news conference, brushing aside criticism by some medical workers that the patient wasn't being held in a special quarantine room. "Isolation is the only requirement," he said, urging calm and repeating several times that Ebola is transmitted only via direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infected person. Mr. Alemany said officials were trying to determine the number of people with which the medical worker, a married woman with no children, had been in touch recently and were taking the temperature of those they had tracked down twice a day. The infected medical worker was one of 30 at Carlos III hospital who had treated Brother Garc a Viejo and a Spanish priest, the Rev. Miguel Pajares, who died of Ebola there in August, five days after being flown to Madrid from Liberia. All of those medical workers are undergoing medical tests, officials said. The Carlos III hospital had been selected and prepared to treat the Rev. Pajares, the first European to be repatriated after being infected during the latest Ebola outbreak. At the time, the Spanish government distributed protocols to all other hospitals and primary health care centers in Madrid on how to treat the disease. "We don't know whether any errors were made," Mr. Alemany said. "We're investigating what the mechanism of transmission could have been." Some Spanish medical worker representatives said the case should spark a re evaluation of the procedures and facilities used to treat Ebola patients. "Something went wrong," M ximo Gonz lez Jurado, head of Spain's General Nursing Council, told Spanish news agency EFE. "They need to establish if the protocol is correct or not correct so that a case like this, that never should have happened, doesn't happen again." Daniel Bernabeu, a radiologist who is president of the Amyts doctors association, said on Monday that he felt "a mix of consternation and indignation" over news of the case. A nurse who treated Spanish missionary Brother Manuel Garc a Viejo for Ebola is suspected of being the first person to contract the virus outside of Africa. European Pressphoto Agency "Work has been carried out according to the established protocols, and it will be necessary to analyze exactly in what circumstances the contagion occurred," Dr. Bernabeu told EFE. "Any contact with an infected patient carried with it a risk the government had to assume." In August, Dr. Bernabeu raised questions about the decision to bring the Rev. Pajares to Spain rather than treat him in Liberia, saying Spanish medical facilities may not have been prepared to handle the disease. The World Health Organization estimates that the latest Ebola outbreak has killed more than 3,400 people. Write to Jeannette Neumann at jeannette.neumann wsj.com and Ilan Brat at ilan.brat wsj.com
THE World Heath Organisation warns there will be more cases of Ebola in Europe after a nurse in Spain became the first person to contract the deadly virus outside Africa. WHO European director Zsuzsanna Jakab says more cases will spread and the continent needed to be well prepared to control the disease. The 40 year old nurse, who contracted the virus after treating two Spanish missionaries who had returned from Africa with Ebola, is in a stable condition in hospital. Armed police have been spotted outside her Madrid home in the suburb of Alcorcon, as curious members of the public gathered outside. Twenty two people who came into contact with the infected nurse are also being monitored. Four of those the nurse, her husband and two others are in hospital. "Such imported cases and similar events as have happened in Spain will happen also in the future, most likely," Ms Jakab told Reuters, reports the Independent. "It is quite unavoidable ... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around," she said. Dr Jakab stressed it was health workers who were most at risk of contracting the virus from the infected, and Europe particularly the western part was prepared to respond to an outbreak. THE first homegrown European case of Ebola was avoidable, virologists say as the EU demanded answers from Madrid. Though there is always a threat to health workers of infection with the virus spread through contact with body fluids, the risk is small and well understood and existing protections effective, the specialists said on Tuesday. "If appropriate containment measures were adopted this really should not have happened," said Jonathan Ball, a virology professor at the University of Notthingham. "It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again." Protesters gathered at the at the Ministry of Health headquarters asking for the resignation of Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato due to the Ebola case. This comes as health care workers, who have been in disagreement with the government over cutbacks, said they had not received proper training or equipment to handle an Ebola case. The Spanish government said on Monday the nurse had contracted the haemorrhagic fever after treating two patients who died at a Madrid hospital both missionaries infected in West Africa, where Ebola has claimed more than 3400 lives. The European Union on Tuesday demanded an explanation from Spain as to how she could have become infected. In comments to Britain's Science Media Centre, experts said protective suits worn by health workers, coupled with safe disposal of patients' bodily waste, substantially reduced the risk. "The recent report of a Spanish nurse who has contracted the virus ... is of concern as it suggests that the barrier methods and training were not sufficient to protect healthcare workers and prevent secondary infection," said virology professor David Evans of the University of Warwick. Ben Neuman, an expert from the University of Reading, said investigators will have to look closely at the disposal of waste at the hospital where she worked. "Nurses face a problem in that a person who is sick with Ebola can make quite a lot of highly infectious waste, as the patient loses fluid through diarrhoea and vomiting. Those bodily fluids can contain millions of Ebola viruses, and it only takes one to transfer the infection." Another concern was that the nurse had gone on holiday the day after the second patient died on September 25, though authorities have not said where she went. After contracting the virus, it takes up to 21 days for a person to develop symptoms, which is when they become infectious. "Reality is that anyone who suspects that they have been exposed to the virus, unless they were properly protected from infection, should not travel until this 21 day incubation period has passed," said Prof Ball. The case underlined the importance of following protection measures to a tee, the experts said. But there was always a risk, however small. A tiny amount of Ebola containing liquid could splash on protective garments and be transferred to a person's skin, for example. "As the African outbreak perfectly illustrates, healthcare workers put their life on the line, so everything should be done to ensure that risks are minimised as much as possible," said Prof Ball. It was also a reminder that the risk of such sporadic exports will increase as more and more people become infected in West Africa. "That is why it is so important for the international community to ramp up their efforts to combat this deadly disease," Prof Ball said. Health authorities have ordered the death of the dog owned by a Spanish health worker infected with Ebola in Madrid, triggering a campaign to save him by her husband and animal rights activists. The husband, Javier Limon, who has been placed in quarantine, contacted local media to object to the decision by Madrid's department of health. "They told me that if I didn't give authorisation, they would get a judicial order to enter my home by force and sacrifice the dog," he told El Mundo newspaper. The authorities said in a statement there was a risk the dog could be "a carrier of the virus even without showing symptoms", and that it could "expel the virus in its fluids with a potential risk of contagion". Romero said the dog, Excalibur, was isolated at home with a stockpile of food and water and could relieve himself outside. The story triggered a petition and some heated responses on Twitter, under the hashtag SalvemosAExcalibur ( SaveExcalibur). Animal rights group Pacma said there was no evidence of the Ebola virus being transmitted from dogs to humans. "He should be examined and placed in quarantine, and treated if necessary," said Javier Moreno, a co founder of Pacma.
A Spanish medical worker has tested positive for Ebola in what is suspected as the first transmission of the disease outside West Africa since the current outbreak began. Photo AP The husband and a co worker of a Spanish nurse's aide who was infected with Ebola in Madrid have been placed in quarantine, officials said Tuesday, as authorities struggled to address international concern over further contagion in the country and beyond. Health officials maintained that all appropriate safety measures were taken in the special Ebola ward where the woman worked. But several nurses who work in the isolation unit said some of the special gear they were provided was inadequate, with one describing having to duct tape her protective clothing to her wrists. (More Fate of Ebola Stricken Nurse's Aide's Dog Sparks Outcry in Spain) More Fate of Nurse's Aide's Dog Sparks Outcry in Spain Health Care Workers Face Ebola Risks How Liberian Farm Became Ebola Sanctuary Spain's medical community and some of its 47 million people reacted with alarm to the first suspected case of transmission outside West Africa. The country's stock market fell as airline and hotel shares took a beating. The Spanish case, along with that of a Liberian man who became ill in Dallas last week after arriving from his home country, has raised concern about weaknesses in developed countries' medical defenses. Hospital officials said Tuesday afternoon that the man, Thomas Eric Duncan, remains in critical, but stable condition. Six Ebola patients have been cared for in U.S. hospitals since the West African outbreak began. The European Union said it had asked Madrid for more details of how the aide had contracted the disease. Ten Ebola patients have been evacuated to European countries so far, according to EU health officials eight to EU countries and one each to Norway and Switzerland. Health care workers called for Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato to resign at a demonstration outside Madrid's La Paz Hospital on Tuesday. Reuters Officials in Norway, France and Germany said they were confident of their own procedures. The World Health Organization's regional director for Europe stressed that the bloc's countries, including Spain, are still considered at low risk for Ebola. Other such isolated cases may occur on the Continent in the coming months as countries there bring home infected citizens from Africa to treat them, Zsuszanna Jakab said. "The preparedness in the EU is very good, probably the best in the world against hemorrhagic fever, including Ebola," Dr. Jakab said. They have lab facilities to test for the virus, isolation wards and trained staff to care for patients and arrangements to trace backward how an Ebola patient came to have contact with the virus. The EU activated its Early Warning and Response System, a confidential computer network that allows the bloc's members to share information on a disease outbreak and coordinate a response. The Ebola outbreak this year has killed more than 3,400 people in West Africa, according to the WHO, and has become a mounting concern to the rest of the world. It has taken a high toll among health care workers, sickening or killing more than 370 in Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone, the hardest hit countries. The Spanish medical worker tested positive after working with a Sierra Leone based missionary who had contracted the disease and was flown to Madrid for treatment. Officials said she complained of mild fever and weakness on Sept. 30, five days after his death, and was isolated on Monday, almost a week later, at a suburban hospital outside Madrid. It isn't clear how long she would have been infectious. Mercedes Vinuesa, Spain's public health director, said officials were monitoring the 29 other members of the medical team and 22 other people she came in contact with since late September. "Every recommendation by the World Health Organization is being followed," Ms. Vinuesa told a parliamentary commission Tuesday. "It must be clear that well implemented safety measures provide a very high security margin" against Ebola infection. The hashtag VamosAMorirTodos "We Are All Going to Die" in Spanish was trending among Twitter users in Spain, according to Trendsmap, a company that tracks popular hashtags on the social media site. An ambulance carrying a Spanish nurse who has contracted Ebola arrives at the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid early Tuesday. Reuters Javier Barrio, an analyst with BPI, said concerns about the economic impact of a larger outbreak are weighing on Spain's stock market. "It's not simply that tourism might be hurt, but also that people may prefer to stay home and stop consuming," he said. Spanish officials said they were investigating how the nurse's aide would have contracted Ebola. Carlos III Hospital, where she worked, was equipped with gloves, gowns, masks, goggles and other gear meant to protect against bodily fluids, which spread the disease. But several nurses who work in the hospital's sixth floor isolation unit said some of the gear was inadequate. One said the yellow coveralls she was issued sometimes failed to loop around her thumbs to keep the sleeves from bunching up and exposing her forearm, so she fixed them to her wrists with duct tape. Another medical worker at the isolation unit said training to handle Ebola patients had been "scarce, and at the last minute." In August, just before the first patient arrived, the hospital called in staff to explain how to put on and remove protective gear, she said. Many who, like herself, were on vacation were later briefed by colleagues but got no formal training, she said. Ms. Vinuesa said the nurse's aide had been moved early Tuesday from the suburban hospital to Carlos III. Officials said her husband was also quarantined there and was being tested, along with a nurse who had treated the missionary. Officials later said the nurse had tested negative for Ebola but remained under quarantine. They didn't say whether the husband had symptoms of Ebola. Doctors were also testing a third quarantined person, a man who returned from a trip to Nigeria with a fever, officials said. They said he had tested negative for Ebola and was awaiting a second test. His nationality wasn't clear. Colleagues identified the infected nurse's aide only by her first name, Teresa, a 44 year old married woman with no children and 14 years on the job. She was one of 30 medical personnel who treated Brother Manuel Garc a Viejo in September and another Spanish missionary, the Rev. Miguel Pajares, who died of Ebola in August after being brought home from Liberia. Colleagues said the nurse's aide had washed Brother Garc a Viejo's body once, changed his diaper and took his temperature while he was alive, and spent an hour cleaning his room the night after his death. She then took time off to take an exam, with the aim of upgrading her temporary contract to a permanent one, but followed the required precautions as soon as she noticed a mild fever, her colleagues said. She checked in with medical staff at a different Madrid hospital but was sent home because her fever didn't exceed 101.48 degrees Fahrenheit, the temperature that would set in motion the protocol to test for Ebola, said Elvira Gonz lez, head of Spain's Nursing Aides Union. The infected worker then checked in with her primary health care physician, who gave her Paracetamol, a common pain reliever, to treat her fever. Then she summoned an ambulance to her home, but her fever still wasn't high enough. "She went to these health professionals basically giving them a prediagnosis," and alerting them that she had worked with an Ebola patient, Ms. Gonz lez said. She also had spots on her skin, Ms. Gonz lez said. A rash is a symptom of Ebola, according to the WHO. As the fever persisted, her colleagues said, the infected woman started sleeping in a separate bedroom and using a different bathroom from those of her husband. She was finally hospitalized and tested after her fever spiked. "It's intimidating," she told nursing colleagues on a WhatsApp chat group after being diagnosed with Ebola. "I'm really scared." Spanish officials said on Tuesday that she was responding well to an experimental Ebola treatment based on antibodies from the bloodstream of an African nun who survived the illness. They said she had a mild fever. Her nursing colleagues said she had suffered vomiting and diarrhea on Monday but those symptoms had subsided. Infectious disease experts said that more about how the transmission happened must be known before it is clear whether any changes in protective procedures are necessary. However, experts agree that the transmission likely was related to human practice rather than the virus itself mutating to become more infectious. For instance, it can be difficult to get out of protective contamination suits, so there could have been a breach during that process. Francisco George, Portugal's top health official, said he suspected the protective gear worn by the Spanish nurse's aide was faulty. Portugal, which hasn't treated Ebola cases, was looking into its own medical protocols for the disease, he said. On Tuesday, a Norwegian who had been working for Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone was flown to Oslo in a special jet for treatment in a hospital unit that handles chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear and explosive agents. Health care workers in yellow protection suits met the patient at the airport. "All patient treatment comes with a certain risk if you break routines," said Espen Nakstad, head of the National CBRNe Medical and Advisory Center, the unit treating the patient. "I don't know what happened in Spain, but if you have good routines and safety equipment, you should be safe." Ilan Brat, Jeannette Neumann, Carlos Lopez Perea, Nicholas Winning, Kjetil Malkenes Hovland and Betsy McKay contributed to this article. Write to Christopher Bjork at christopher.bjork wsj.com and Shirley S. Wang at shirley.wang wsj.com
The Spanish nurse who became the first person in Europe to become infected with Ebola says she 'hasn't the slightest idea' how she contracted the killer disease. Teresa Romero Ramos, 44, from Galicia in northwest Spain, one of the medical team that treated two repatriated Spanish priests who died from Ebola, was diagnosed with the illness on Monday. She is now being held in quarantine at a hospital in Madrid under police guard but terrifyingly said she followed all safety protocols but still became ill. Ebola is spread via bodily fluids like vomit or diarrhoea, but Mrs Romero Ramos wore a protective suit and there are fears the clothing did not meet safety standards. When asked how she thinks she became ill she told El Mundo 'I can't tell you, I haven't the slightest idea'. She was asked if she did anything that would have put herself at risk she said 'No, not at all,' adding 'yes, I followed protocols'. Mrs Romero Ramos said days after contracting Ebola 'I'm a little better now' but would not expand on her health and was described as struggling to speak by the journalist who briefly interviewed her. Her husband Javier Limon Romero, who is also in quarantine over fears he may too have contracted the disease, said his wife was not worried about getting ill and volunteered to help the priests. 'She volunteered. Other people run way. But not Teresa,' he said. 'I have heard that others called in sick. But not Teresa. She asked to be sent there.' Armed police have been spotted outside the nurse's Madrid home in the suburb of Alcorcon, as curious members of the public gathered outside. Their identities came out after Mr Romero asked a Spanish animal charity to start a social media campaign to stop health officials putting his dog down. Her husband raged 'I want to publicly denounce a man called Zarco, who I think is Head of Health for the community of Madrid and who's told me that I have to sacrifice my dog. He's asked for my consent and I've denied it, to which he responded that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and sacrifice it.' Anger was growing in Spain meanwhile over how the nurse became infected with Ebola as it was claimed the protective suits given to health officials were not good enough. Four suspected Ebola patients are now in hospital in Madrid after Teresa Romero Ramos was confirmed as the first person to catch the virus outside of West Africa. The escalation in Spain's Ebola outbreak comes as officials revealed 30 people were being monitored for symptoms. In a further worrying development, the World Health Organisation says Europe must brace itself for even more outbreaks. It has also since emerged that a week before she tested positive for Ebola the nurse had contacted health workers to complain of a fever and fatigue, telling them she had helped treat two priests who contracted Ebola in Africa and were repatriated to Spain. But it wasn't until she went to her local hospital on Monday that she was finally admitted and tested for the virus. It is not the same hospital where she worked, raising questions over the number of people she has come into contact with. Today husband Javier, who is also being looked after at the Carlos III Hospital, spoke to respected Spanish daily El Mundo, which managed to get a quick phone interview with him in hospital. He sounded fit and in good health during their five minute chat. He told the paper 'My wife has been working normally and has followed all the normal protocols. 'We've no idea how she could have been infected. 'She's never appeared worried about anything. We were going to go on holiday and couldn't because of an accident I had at work. 'She volunteered to help the second priest who died from Ebola. She was on the rota when the first patient arrived but volunteered second time round.' Anger was growing in Spain today over how the nurse became infected with Ebola as it was claimed the protective suits given to health officials were not good enough. Four suspected Ebola patients are now in hospital in Madrid after Teresa Romero Ramos was confirmed as the first person to catch the virus outside of West Africa. The escalation in Spain's Ebola outbreak comes as officials revealed 30 people were being monitored for symptoms, Meanwhile the World Health Organisation warned that it is 'unavoidable' more cases will be diagnosed in Europe. WHO's European director Zsuzsanna Jakab said further such events were 'unavoidable'. She said 'Such imported cases and similar events as have happened in Spain will happen also in the future, most likely. 'It is quite unavoidable... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around.' 'It will happen,' she added. 'But the most important thing in our view is that Europe is still at low risk and that the western part of the European region particularly is the best prepared in the world to respond to viral hemorrhagic fevers including Ebola.' Officials have said they 'don't know' how the Spanish nurse became infected with the deadly virus. But last night staff at the Carlos III hospital where she worked claimed the protective suits they were given were not good enough. Unnamed sources told Spanish daily El Pais the suits did not meet World Health Organisation standards. They said the suits they were issued with were permeable and lacked breathing apparatus. 'At the moment we are investigating the way in which the professional was infected,' said Antonio Alemany, the head of Madrid's primary health care services. 'We don't know yet what failed,' he was quoted by the Guardian as saying. 'We're investigating the mechanism of infection.' Mercedes Vinuesa, the head of Spain's public health service, told parliament today that the nurse's husband had been placed in quarantine. Although he has shown no signs of Ebola, the measures have been taken as a precaution. In addition, a second nurse who also treated the priest who died on September 25 was put into quarantine after experiencing diarrhoea but she did not have a fever, the most common initial symptom for Ebola. A Nigerian man who recently arrived in Spain is also under quarantine but tested negative for Ebola in his first test. News of the quarantines has hit Spain's stock market. It is one of Europe's biggest tourist destinations and stocks in companies such as airlines and hotel chains fell on the Madrid stock exchange. Prof Jonathan Ball, Professor of Molecular Virology at the University of Nottingham, said 'If appropriate containment measures were adopted this really should not have happened. 'It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again. 'As the African outbreak perfectly illustrates, healthcare workers put their life on the line, so everything should be done to ensure that risks are minimised as much as possible. 'As for the suggestion of screening people as they arrive at airports, this would only work if people were already showing symptoms.' Dr Ben Neuman, Lecturer in Virology, University of Reading, said 'Nurses face a problem in that a person who is sick with Ebola can make quite a lot of highly infectious waste, as the patient loses fluid through diarrhoea and vomiting. 'Those bodily fluids can contain millions of Ebola viruses, and it only takes one to transfer the infection. 'The protective suits that Ebola workers wear provide excellent protection, but there is a danger when it is time to take the suit off. 'It is also possible that a tiny amount of Ebola containing liquid splashed on the protective garments, and then was transferred to her skin while removing the protective clothing.' Two separate tests confirmed that the woman had contracted the disease. Despite the concerns raised today, colleagues last night expressed their surprise at news the nurse had contracted the virus, saying that there had been 'extreme' measures in place to protect hospital staff. One told Spanish daily El Pais that nurses were equipped with two protective overalls, two pairs of gloves and glasses. All medics had to use a special card to access the hospital's sixth floor where the two men were treated. The Carlos III Hospital was evacuated before the arrival of the first missionary, Miguel Pajares, who contracted the disease in Liberia, but not for Mr Viejo as the sixth floor had already been hermetically sealed. Mr Pajares, the first person in Europe to be treated for Ebola, died at Madrid's Carlos III Hospital in August despite receiving experimental drug ZMapp after he returned. Mr Viejo died at the hospital the following month after contracting the virus in Sierra Leone. The Spanish nurse is understood to have tested positive for Ebola in a first analysis after going to hospital in Alcorcon near Madrid with a high fever early yesterday morning. Doctors isolated the emergency treatment room. A Ministry of Health source told Spanish daily El Mundo 'She arrived at the University Hospital Alcorcon Foundation with fever and has undergone tests. The first test has come back positive.' Meanwhile, in Oslo medical teams received their country's first Ebola victim after a Doctors Without Borders worker flew home after testing positive for the virus. Anne Cecilie Kaltenborn, the organization's general secretary in Norway, said the Norwegian female doctor started feeling sick over the weekend and was isolated after she came down with a fever on Sunday. 'We don't know how she was infected. We have very strict rules about working in the field, and all our workers use protective clothing,' Ms Kaltenborn told reporters in Oslo. 'She will be placed in an isolation ward in hospital in Oslo after arrival.' Ms Kaltenborn declined to name the worker or give further details pending an investigation by the organization. She said Doctors Without Borders has 86 foreign workers among the 1,200 working currently in Sierra Leone. Health Minister Bent Hoie said Norway is ready to accept the patient and that health officials had been preparing for months to treat people infected with the virus. Ebola spreads through contact with the bodily fluids of someone who has the virus and the only way to stop an outbreak is to isolate those who are infected. The current outbreak in west Africa, the worst ever, has infected nearly 7,500 people and caused more than 3,400 deaths. There have been a handful of cases in the West. British nurse William Pooley, 29, who was infected with the virus while working in Sierra Leone, recovered last month after being flown back to London for treatment. He later jetted to the US to give blood to an American battling the disease. Today in the U.S., video journalist Ashoka Mukpo, who became infected while working in Liberia, arrived at the Nebraska Medical Centre in Omaha. It's not clear how he was infected said his father, Dr. Mitchell Levy, adding that on Monday, his symptoms of fever and nausea still appeared mild. Mr Mukpo is the fifth American sick with Ebola brought back from West Africa for medical care. The others were aid workers three have recovered and one remains hospitalised. There are no approved drugs for Ebola, so doctors have tried experimental treatments in some cases. A critically ill Liberian man hospitalised in Dallas is getting an experimental treatment, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said. Thomas Eric Duncan is the first person to be diagnosed with Ebola in the U.S., he was admitted to the hospital on September 28. The hospital said Mr Duncan was receiving an experimental medication called brincidofovir, which was developed to treat other types of viruses. Laboratory tests suggested it may also work against Ebola. Texas Governor Rick Perry urged the U.S. government to begin screening air passengers arriving from Ebola affected nations, including taking their temperatures. But Federal health officials say a travel ban could make the desperate situation worse in those countries. White House spokesman Josh Earnest said it was not currently under consideration. President Barack Obama said the U.S. will be 'working on protocols to do additional passenger screening both at the source and here in the United States.' He did not outline any details. Leading charity Save the Children warned recently Ebola is spreading at a 'terrifying rate' with the number of recorded cases doubling every week. Speaking at a conference in London co hosted with Sierra Leone last week, UK Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond called for more financial aid, doctors and nurses. Scientists have warned that the deadly virus could spread across the world infecting people from the U.S. to China within three weeks. There is a 50 per cent chance a traveller carrying the disease could touch down in the UK by October 24, a team of U.S. researchers have predicted. Using Ebola spread patterns and airline traffic data they have calculated the odds of the virus spreading across the world. They estimate there is a 75 per cent chance Ebola will reach French shores by October 24. And Belgium has a 40 per cent chance of seeing the disease arrive on its territory, while Spain and Switzerland have lower risks of 14 per cent each. Professor Alessandro Vespignani of Northeastern University in Boston, who led the research, said 'This is not a deterministic list, it's about probabilities but those probabilities are growing for everyone. 'It's just a matter of who gets lucky and who gets unlucky. 'Air traffic is the driver.
The Spanish nurse who became the first person in Europe to become infected with Ebola says she 'hasn't the slightest idea' how she contracted the killer disease. Teresa Romero Ramos, 44, from Galicia in northwest Spain, one of the medical team that treated two repatriated Spanish priests who died from Ebola, was diagnosed with the illness on Monday. She is now being held in quarantine at a hospital in Madrid under police guard but terrifyingly said she followed all safety protocols but still became ill. Ebola is spread via bodily fluids like vomit or diarrhoea, but Mrs Romero Ramos wore a protective suit and there are fears the clothing did not meet safety standards. When asked how she thinks she became ill she told El Mundo 'I can't tell you, I haven't the slightest idea'. She was asked if she did anything that would have put herself at risk she said 'No, not at all,' adding 'yes, I followed protocols'. Mrs Romero Ramos said days after contracting Ebola 'I'm a little better now' but would not expand on her health and was described as struggling to speak by the journalist who briefly interviewed her. Her husband Javier Limon Romero, who is also in quarantine over fears he may too have contracted the disease, said his wife was not worried about getting ill and volunteered to help the priests. 'She volunteered. Other people run way. But not Teresa,' he said. 'I have heard that others called in sick. But not Teresa. She asked to be sent there.' Armed police have been spotted outside the nurse's Madrid home in the suburb of Alcorcon, as curious members of the public gathered outside. Their identities came out after Mr Romero asked a Spanish animal charity to start a social media campaign to stop health officials putting his dog down. Her husband raged 'I want to publicly denounce a man called Zarco, who I think is Head of Health for the community of Madrid and who's told me that I have to sacrifice my dog. He's asked for my consent and I've denied it, to which he responded that they would ask for a court order to enter my house and sacrifice it.' Anger was growing in Spain meanwhile over how the nurse became infected with Ebola as it was claimed the protective suits given to health officials were not good enough. Four suspected Ebola patients are now in hospital in Madrid after Teresa Romero Ramos was confirmed as the first person to catch the virus outside of West Africa. The escalation in Spain's Ebola outbreak comes as officials revealed 30 people were being monitored for symptoms. In a further worrying development, the World Health Organisation says Europe must brace itself for even more outbreaks. It has also since emerged that a week before she tested positive for Ebola the nurse had contacted health workers to complain of a fever and fatigue, telling them she had helped treat two priests who contracted Ebola in Africa and were repatriated to Spain. But it wasn't until she went to her local hospital on Monday that she was finally admitted and tested for the virus. It is not the same hospital where she worked, raising questions over the number of people she has come into contact with. Today husband Javier, who is also being looked after at the Carlos III Hospital, spoke to respected Spanish daily El Mundo, which managed to get a quick phone interview with him in hospital. He sounded fit and in good health during their five minute chat. He told the paper 'My wife has been working normally and has followed all the normal protocols. 'We've no idea how she could have been infected. 'She's never appeared worried about anything. We were going to go on holiday and couldn't because of an accident I had at work. 'She volunteered to help the second priest who died from Ebola. She was on the rota when the first patient arrived but volunteered second time round.' Anger was growing in Spain today over how the nurse became infected with Ebola as it was claimed the protective suits given to health officials were not good enough. Meanwhile the World Health Organisation warned that it is 'unavoidable' more cases will be diagnosed in Europe. WHO's European director Zsuzsanna Jakab said further such events were 'unavoidable'. She said 'Such imported cases and similar events as have happened in Spain will happen also in the future, most likely. 'It is quite unavoidable... that such incidents will happen in the future because of the extensive travel both from Europe to the affected countries and the other way around.' 'It will happen,' she added. 'But the most important thing in our view is that Europe is still at low risk and that the western part of the European region particularly is the best prepared in the world to respond to viral hemorrhagic fevers including Ebola.' Officials have said they 'don't know' how the Spanish nurse became infected with the deadly virus. But last night staff at the Carlos III hospital where she worked claimed the protective suits they were given were not good enough. Unnamed sources told Spanish daily El Pais the suits did not meet World Health Organisation standards. They said the suits they were issued with were permeable and lacked breathing apparatus. 'At the moment we are investigating the way in which the professional was infected,' said Antonio Alemany, the head of Madrid's primary health care services. 'We don't know yet what failed,' he was quoted by the Guardian as saying. 'We're investigating the mechanism of infection.' Mercedes Vinuesa, the head of Spain's public health service, told parliament today that the nurse's husband had been placed in quarantine. Although he has shown no signs of Ebola, the measures have been taken as a precaution. In addition, a second nurse who also treated the priest who died on September 25 was put into quarantine after experiencing diarrhoea but she did not have a fever, the most common initial symptom for Ebola. A Nigerian man who recently arrived in Spain is also under quarantine but tested negative for Ebola in his first test. News of the quarantines has hit Spain's stock market. It is one of Europe's biggest tourist destinations and stocks in companies such as airlines and hotel chains fell on the Madrid stock exchange. Prof Jonathan Ball, Professor of Molecular Virology at the University of Nottingham, said 'If appropriate containment measures were adopted this really should not have happened. 'It will be crucial to find out what went wrong in this case so necessary measures can be taken to ensure it doesn't happen again. 'As the African outbreak perfectly illustrates, healthcare workers put their life on the line, so everything should be done to ensure that risks are minimised as much as possible. 'As for the suggestion of screening people as they arrive at airports, this would only work if people were already showing symptoms.' Dr Ben Neuman, Lecturer in Virology, University of Reading, said 'Nurses face a problem in that a person who is sick with Ebola can make quite a lot of highly infectious waste, as the patient loses fluid through diarrhoea and vomiting. 'Those bodily fluids can contain millions of Ebola viruses, and it only takes one to transfer the infection. 'The protective suits that Ebola workers wear provide excellent protection, but there is a danger when it is time to take the suit off. 'It is also possible that a tiny amount of Ebola containing liquid splashed on the protective garments, and then was transferred to her skin while removing the protective clothing.' Two separate tests confirmed that the woman had contracted the disease. Despite the concerns raised today, colleagues last night expressed their surprise at news the nurse had contracted the virus, saying that there had been 'extreme' measures in place to protect hospital staff. One told Spanish daily El Pais that nurses were equipped with two protective overalls, two pairs of gloves and glasses. All medics had to use a special card to access the hospital's sixth floor where the two men were treated. The Carlos III Hospital was evacuated before the arrival of the first missionary, Miguel Pajares, who contracted the disease in Liberia, but not for Mr Viejo as the sixth floor had already been hermetically sealed. Mr Pajares, the first person in Europe to be treated for Ebola, died at Madrid's Carlos III Hospital in August despite receiving experimental drug ZMapp after he returned. Mr Viejo died at the hospital the following month after contracting the virus in Sierra Leone. The Spanish nurse is understood to have tested positive for Ebola in a first analysis after going to hospital in Alcorcon near Madrid with a high fever early yesterday morning. Doctors isolated the emergency treatment room. A Ministry of Health source told Spanish daily El Mundo 'She arrived at the University Hospital Alcorcon Foundation with fever and has undergone tests. The first test has come back positive.' Meanwhile, in Oslo medical teams received their country's first Ebola victim after a Doctors Without Borders worker flew home after testing positive for the virus. Anne Cecilie Kaltenborn, the organization's general secretary in Norway, said the Norwegian female doctor started feeling sick over the weekend and was isolated after she came down with a fever on Sunday. 'We don't know how she was infected. We have very strict rules about working in the field, and all our workers use protective clothing,' Ms Kaltenborn told reporters in Oslo. 'She will be placed in an isolation ward in hospital in Oslo after arrival.' Ms Kaltenborn declined to name the worker or give further details pending an investigation by the organization. She said Doctors Without Borders has 86 foreign workers among the 1,200 working currently in Sierra Leone. Health Minister Bent Hoie said Norway is ready to accept the patient and that health officials had been preparing for months to treat people infected with the virus. Ebola spreads through contact with the bodily fluids of someone who has the virus and the only way to stop an outbreak is to isolate those who are infected. The current outbreak in west Africa, the worst ever, has infected nearly 7,500 people and caused more than 3,400 deaths. There have been a handful of cases in the West. British nurse William Pooley, 29, who was infected with the virus while working in Sierra Leone, recovered last month after being flown back to London for treatment. He later jetted to the US to give blood to an American battling the disease. Today in the U.S., video journalist Ashoka Mukpo, who became infected while working in Liberia, arrived at the Nebraska Medical Centre in Omaha. It's not clear how he was infected said his father, Dr. Mitchell Levy, adding that on Monday, his symptoms of fever and nausea still appeared mild. Mr Mukpo is the fifth American sick with Ebola brought back from West Africa for medical care. The others were aid workers three have recovered and one remains hospitalised. There are no approved drugs for Ebola, so doctors have tried experimental treatments in some cases. A critically ill Liberian man hospitalised in Dallas is getting an experimental treatment, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said. Thomas Eric Duncan is the first person to be diagnosed with Ebola in the U.S., he was admitted to the hospital on September 28. The hospital said Mr Duncan was receiving an experimental medication called brincidofovir, which was developed to treat other types of viruses. Laboratory tests suggested it may also work against Ebola. Texas Governor Rick Perry urged the U.S. government to begin screening air passengers arriving from Ebola affected nations, including taking their temperatures. But Federal health officials say a travel ban could make the desperate situation worse in those countries. White House spokesman Josh Earnest said it was not currently under consideration. President Barack Obama said the U.S. will be 'working on protocols to do additional passenger screening both at the source and here in the United States.' He did not outline any details. Leading charity Save the Children warned recently Ebola is spreading at a 'terrifying rate' with the number of recorded cases doubling every week. Speaking at a conference in London co hosted with Sierra Leone last week, UK Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond called for more financial aid, doctors and nurses. Scientists have warned that the deadly virus could spread across the world infecting people from the U.S. to China within three weeks. There is a 50 per cent chance a traveller carrying the disease could touch down in the UK by October 24, a team of U.S. researchers have predicted. Using Ebola spread patterns and airline traffic data they have calculated the odds of the virus spreading across the world. They estimate there is a 75 per cent chance Ebola will reach French shores by October 24. And Belgium has a 40 per cent chance of seeing the disease arrive on its territory, while Spain and Switzerland have lower risks of 14 per cent each. Professor Alessandro Vespignani of Northeastern University in Boston, who led the research, said 'This is not a deterministic list, it's about probabilities but those probabilities are growing for everyone. 'It's just a matter of who gets lucky and who gets unlucky. 'Air traffic is the driver.
Health workers attend a protest outside La Paz Hospital calling for Spain's Health Minister Ana Mato to resign after a Spanish nurse contracted Ebola, in Madrid(Andrea Comas Reuters) Four people, including the husband of the nurse who earlier contracted the Ebola virus, have been admitted to hospital in Spain in fear of an outbreak as another nurse was detected with possible symptoms of infection. The first nurse, identified as Teresa Romero Ramos, was the first person to become infected by the virus in Europe. About 50 people are also being monitored as a precaution although there have been no symptoms. "We are all worried, not just me, everyone. This is like a snowball, you just don't know where it's going to stop. If every person who has had contact with this person has contact with another 30, 40 persons, if this person meets another five, this could snowball," Ramos's neighbour who gave only his first name, Francisco, told Euronews. Several protesters also demonstrated outside the Spanish health ministry asking the minister to step down. Madrid health officials have released a video of quarantining the room where the victim stayed in order to calm the public. Meanwhile, a second nurse, who was part of Ramos's medical team which treated two Spanish missionaries in Africa, has been taken to hospital with symptoms of virus. Spokespeople of La Paz and Carlos III hospitals have confirmed the yet unidentified woman is running a fever and is under routine observation. The second potential victim is said to be a "friend" of Ramos. "They have told us that she is fine, but they have admitted her just in case," a hospital source told Spanish daily El Pais. RelatedEbola New Drug Target Developed That Can Be Used Against the VirusWHO Ebola Cases in Europe 'Unavoidable'Ebola Outbreak Authorities to Kill Spanish Nurse's Dog Fearing ContagionEbola Outbreak Infected Nurse's Husband Quarantined in Spain
In this image made from undated video provided by the Madrid Regional Health Authority on Tuesday, medical workers in protective clothing clean the Madrid hospital room of priest Miguel Pajares, who died in August after contracting Ebola. Associated Press MADRID A third nurse's aide who treated an Ebola patient in Madrid checked into a hospital Tuesday night and was under observation, the government said on Wednesday. A spokesman for Spain's regional health department said the hospital worker, whose name wasn't disclosed, had a slight fever, one possible early symptom of Ebola. The aide was part of the medical team that treated Manuel Garc a Viejo, a 69 year old Spanish missionary who contracted Ebola in Sierra Leone and was evacuated to Madrid. He died in late September. On Monday, Spain's government said a 44 year old nurse's aide who also treated the missionary, had contracted Ebola and was under quarantine. By Tuesday, the government also quarantined her husband, a second nurse's aide and a man who had recently traveled to Spain from Nigeria. On Tuesday evening, the government said the second nurse's aide had tested negative twice for Ebola, but she remained under hospital supervision. The first transmission of Ebola outside West Africa is a concern for European governments who have been relying on standardized Ebola protocols to avoid spreading the disease as they care for repatriated patients who contracted it in Africa. European authorities called for an investigation to determine whether any treatment protocols had been breached. Spanish health officials said they were studying how the nurse's aide could have become infected. Some nurses and other medical professionals have complained that the government provided them inadequate training and protective gear. Spanish government officials say they followed all World Health Organizationprocedures for handling Ebola patients and have the situation under control. Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy on Wednesday urged Spaniards to remain calm, reiterating health officials' message that Ebola is only spread from direct contact with the fluids of a person infected by the virus. "It's not easily spread," Mr. Rajoy told lawmakers Wednesday. "Let the health professionals do their job," Mr. Rajoy added. "The Spanish health system is one of the best in the world." The government said Tuesday the aide who was infected, identified as Teresa, remained in stable condition. No update was available on Wednesday morning. She had a mild fever and was responding well to an experimental Ebola treatment based on antibodies from the bloodstream of an African nun who survived the illness. Spanish daily El Mundo quoted Teresa as saying she had no idea how she became infected with the virus. "I can't say," she said in a brief telephone interview published Wednesday on the front page. "I'm a little better," she said. "I don't want to talk because I get tired," she added, bringing the conversation to an end.
Teresa Ramos, Spain's Ebola infected nurse, was reportedly separated only by curtains from other patients at a Madrid hospital where she was tested for the virus. The country's underfunded health service is under fire for its "inadequate" response. Ebola spread 'unavoidable' in Europe due to extensive travel WHO Ramos, 44, who tested positive for Ebola, was not immediately accepted to the central Carlos III hospital, where she came to report possible symptoms of the deadly virus, and where Ebola patients have previously received treatment, Diario Enfermero (Nurse Journal) has reported. She was instead sent to her local medical facility the Alcorc n hospital, also in the Spanish capital. There, the woman was reportedly "for hours" only separated by curtains from the rest of the patients while waiting for her Ebola test results, according to the hospital staff. The nurses allegedly attended her without any protective clothing on. The report has been issued at a time when the country's healthcare officials have increasingly come under fire from trade unions over "inadequate" efforts in tackling the Ebola virus. Bringing the infected missionaries from Africa to Spain was a "completely improvised hospital campaign," said Elena Moral, a spokesperson for the Independent Trade Union of Employees (CSI F), El Pais reported. "We did not have the infrastructure to deal with a virus of this magnitude," she said. Healthcare activists report that Madrid's authorities decided to "dismantle" the infectious diseases center at the Carlos III hospital just months before the Ebola patients were brought there. The "dismantling" has led to Ebola being "treated in a place that did not meet adequate security conditions," according to a spokesman for the Public Health Service Defense Federation, Dr Marciano S nchez Bayle. "The whole section devoted to infectious illnesses has been closed," he explained in an interview with Euronews. "The professionals who worked there have been moved to other positions. The laboratory was closed, and so was the intensive care unit. It's just to say that, one way or another, its capacity to take care of illnesses with these characteristics has been most remarkably reduced." Trade unions have called for the resignations of health officials of various levels from the hospital management to Health Minister Ana Mato. There have also been calls for President of the Community of Madrid, Ignacio Gonzalez, to step down over the decision to "dismantle" the infectious disease section of Carlos III hospital. Ebola Evolution of an epidemic (INTERACTIVE MAP) Ramos treated two Ebola infected missionaries who were brought from Sierra Leone and Liberia to Spain and eventually died in hospital. On Tuesday, four more people were hospitalized in Spain on suspicion they could have contracted the disease. Two of them have since tested negative for Ebola. Unions have complained of poor training and inadequate protective clothing the medical staff received before having to take care of Ebola patients. There have also been reports that waste from the rooms of the infected patients was carried out in the same elevator used by all personnel. Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy was grilled by Congress on Wednesday on whether the government could guarantee the Ebola virus was under control in the country. "We are facing an issue of concern and rightly so," Rajoy said as cited by El Mundo. He added that "a monitoring committee has been created" to "investigate what happened and explain the whole to the public." The PM asked Spnaiards to be "be vigilant, while keeping calm" concerning the Ebola virus, following reports that the country has been unprepared to tackle the virus. One of the discoverers of Ebola, Peter Piot, a professor at the London School of Tropical Medicine, has warned that treating those infected by the virus demands draconian discipline. "It should be a lesson for everybody that you can't overreact. You can't overprotect," he told a WHO science group teleconference, Reuters reported.
Maria Teresa Romero Ramos, a Spanish sanitary technician who became the first case of Ebola transmission outside of Africa, said she followed all the appropriate protocols when entering the room of an Ebola patient at Carlos III Hospital. In an interview with Spanish newspaper El Mundo from her isolated hospital bed, Ramos was asked how she contracted the virus even though she followed the hospital's safety protocols. "I cannot tell you, I have no idea," she said. Ramos became infected when she was treating Manuel Garcia Viejo, a priest who contracted the virus in West Africa. She entered Viejo's room only twice, once to change his diaper, and a second time to remove his belongings after he died on Sept. 25. She began experiencing symptoms of Ebola on Sept. 30, but was only admitted to the hospital Sunday. Tests confirmed Monday that she had contracted Ebola. Meanwhile, Spanish officials have received approval from a Madrid court to euthanize her dog, Excalibur. In a plea to sympathizers, her husband, Javier Lim n, who is also in quarantine in the hospital, asked the public to convince Spanish officials to spare the mixed breed dog's life. "Hello, I'm Javier, the husband of Teresa Romero. I'm in the hospital, and I'm asking the population to help me to save my dog Excalibur who they Spanish health officials want to kill," Lim n said in a video message. One scientific study suggests dogs can carry the Ebola virus without showing symptoms, according to the Associated Press. But Tom Frieden, director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said in a news conference Tuesday that the canines are not believed to transmit the disease. "We have not identified this as a means of transmission," Frieden said in response to a question about the Spanish case. Carlos Rodriguez, a Spanish veterinarian and talk show host, said that the nurse's husband reached out to him from the hospital for help, according to the AP. Now that there is a court order to euthanize the animal, "I can't stop this happening," Rodriguez said, according to the AP. Lim n "asked me, crying, to at least make sure the animal does not suffer." On Twitter, supporters around the world have used the hashtag SaveExcalibur. Hospital and Spanish health officials are scrambling to find out how their systems failed to prevent Ramos from becoming infected, as tensions grow among health workers concerned for their safety in Ebola treatment wards. "This has taken us by surprise," said Rafael Perez Santamaria, head of the Carlos III Hospital, according to Reuters. "We are revising our protocols, improving them." Doctors protesting outside of the hospital on Tuesday called for the resignation of Spanish Health Minister Ana Mato, and they were joined in those calls by a Spanish doctors union. In addition to Ramos and her husband, five others were hospitalized because of suspicions that they might have Ebola. One Spanish man who had recently traveled to Nigeria, and a nurse both tested negative for the virus in lab tests. Another nurse remains hospitalized, according to Reuters. Lim n, who also spoke to El Mundo in an interview, said that when his wife's symptoms began she stayed "mostly at home" until she was admitted to the hospital on Sunday. Since being treated, Ramos said she is feeling "a little better."
(CNN) The news that a Spanish woman has contracted the Ebola virus has raised questions about what went wrong in the treatment of two patients evacuated from West Africa to Madrid, allowing the potentially deadly disease to spread from person to person outside Africa for the first time in this outbreak. How did the patient contract Ebola? The woman is a nursing assistant at the Carlos III Hospital in Madrid it is thought she was exposed to the virus while trying to help one of the two Spanish people flown there for treatment after they contracted Ebola in West Africa. Spanish health authorities insist all health protocols and procedures were followed in the care of missionaries Manuel Garcia Viejo, who became sick while working in Sierra Leone, and Miguel Pajares, who was taken ill in Liberia. Both men eventually died of the disease. An investigation is under way into how the woman, who is in her 40s and married, was infected. It is thought there was no obvious problem, such as a torn glove, which would have raised the alarm concerns only emerged when she became ill on September 30, four days after the death of the second patient. Dr. William Schaffner, from the Department of Preventive Medicine at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee, said the woman's infection was likely due to "gaps in the safety protocol, the infection control precautions" at the hospital. "Healthcare workers are at really great risk when they take care of patients with Ebola, and we anticipate that from time to time there may be one or perhaps even a few cases of transmission from patients with Ebola, during healthcare, to their healthcare providers," Schaffner told CNN. However, some Spanish unions are blaming the government, saying they warned that personal protective equipment used by the medical team did not meet the highest standard authorities say proper procedures were followed. Epidemiologist Professor David Heymann, who worked on the world's first Ebola outbreak and now heads Public Health England, said the precise cause of the infection may never be known. "The barrier was let down somehow," he said. "It could be something as simple as a defect in a rubber glove, or a momentary lapse, or it could be something major that the nurse does not want to report. These things do happen it's not clear and may never be." How can hospitals protect medical staff from Ebola? The Ebola virus is transmitted by contact with the body fluids of an infected person, so hospitals must take steps to ensure their workers are protected from them. "There are protocols that if you follow carefully, you diminish greatly the likelihood that you're going to get infected," explained immunologist Dr. Anthony Fauci, of the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend that medical personnel treating those with Ebola wear protective clothing including gloves, an impermeable gown and eye protection. It says extra precautions should be taken when the patient's condition means they are likely to come into contact with "copious amounts of blood, body fluids, vomit or feces." Fauci says that to keep medical staff safe "it's more than just goggles and gloves. It's a hood, it's a gown, it's a rubber apron, it's coverings for your shoes. It's everything that can keep a splash of body fluid away from you." And he says that as well as having the right equipment, workers must know how to use it effectively, and to dispose of it properly. "It's important to wear it, but it's important also that when you take it off, you take it off properly," he insists. "It is conceivable that you could be protected while you're doing everything you need to do with the patient and then as you remove the protective material that could be a point of vulnerability." In addition to Spain, patients suffering from Ebola have been evacuated to Germany (two), France (one), the UK (one) and Norway (one) this is the first time a medical worker treating one of them has been infected. "The hospitals where the patients are being taken are supposed to be equipped and ready to deal with Ebola patients," European Commission spokesman Frederic Vincent told CNN. All members of the medical team which treated Garcia Viejo are now under observation, as are the woman's husband and the ambulance crew which took her to hospital. READ MORE Scientists race to develop Ebola drugs Is Ebola likely to spread in Europe? Following news of their colleague's illness, medical staff in Spain have taken to the streets complaining at the way the government has handled the Ebola cases. "We were kind of expecting this," said Paloma, a nursing assistant at Madrid's La Paz Hospital. "At least I was expecting it, because this is not a game to be played in the way that they've done it. It's a very worrying matter, and they have not handled it correctly." Some argue that the two missionaries were so ill they should not have been brought to Spain for treatment, exposing many others to the disease. But experts insist the risk of an Ebola outbreak outside Africa are still very slim. "If protocols are being followed, it's highly unlikely that an outbreak could happen in the EU," said Vincent. "But zero risk doesn't exist, particularly in a hospital where staff are dealing with sick people. "We need to find out as soon as possible what happened and if we need to revise procedures." READ MORE How the Ebola virus spreads What lessons can be learned from the Spanish case? Experts say the news from Madrid should act as a wake up call to healthcare authorities around the world of the risks their frontline staff face, of the precautions that need to be taken when dealing with Ebola, and of the need for everyone to be prepared. "If you're running a hospital or if you're a public health administrator in a big city, you should definitely be concerned by this," said Dr. Alexander van Tulleken of Fordham University in New York. "This should be a disease you can prevent by really rigorously adhering to protocols, and what we're seeing with this case is that even if teams notionally know what they're doing there's a protocol in the drawer, they've ordered the right kind of suits that people have to be really well versed in putting them on, in taking them off, in practicing. "This is about drill, practice and preparedness," he said. "Every hospital everywhere needs to be aware that this could come to them," insisted Professor Heymann. "They need protocols in place, and they need to be ready to deal with it."
THE SOONER YOU ACT ON THIS STUFF, THE BETTER OFF YOU ARE After Its First Ebola Case, Spain Seeks to Prevent Spread of Virus. Spain intensified efforts on Tuesday to contain any spread of Ebola from an infected health worker as the government came under increased pressure from the political opposition and the European Union. The health worker, a nurse who has not been identified, was described as being in a stable condition. Her husband was quarantined, and monitoring was extended to medical staff who came into in contact with her. The nurse contracted the illness while treating a Spanish missionary who was infected in Sierra Leone and flown to Carlos III Hospital in Madrid. Opposition politicians said Tuesday that Ana Mato, the health minister, needed to explain any safety lapse, while some called for her immediate removal. Caridad Garc a lvarez, a lawmaker from the United Left party, wrote on Twitter that Ms. Mato needed to resign after ignoring warnings from health workers about inadequate safety measures. . . . Carlos III Hospital had been specifically selected by Spain to welcome repatriated Ebola patients, and Yolanda Fuentes, a deputy director of the hospital, said Monday that the protective suits worn by health workers "comply perfectly with the protocol and the required protective measures for this disease." The European Commission wrote to the Madrid government requesting an explanation of how the nurse was infected, Agence France Presse reported, citing Fr d ric Vincent, a spokesman for the commission. A European health safety committee is set to meet on Wednesday to review the situation. Still, Mr. Vincent said it was "highly improbable" that the virus would spread further across Europe. As an assistant nurse, the woman who became infected had only twice entered the room of Manuel Garc a Viejo, a priest who died of Ebola, including once after his death, according to Antonio Alemany, a health official from the regional government of Madrid. It's not clear to me that the infection control precautions for Ebola are sufficient to protect health workers, given how many of them have been infected. ANOTHER UPDATE Ebola in Spain raises questions about protection. "Three more people were under quarantine Tuesday for possible Ebola at a Madrid hospital after a Spanish nursing assistant became infected there, authorities said. More than 50 others were being monitored as experts pressed to figure out why Spain's anti infection practices failed. Health authorities were investigating how the nursing assistant, part of a special team that cared for a Spanish priest who died of Ebola last month, became infected. She was the first case of Ebola being transmitted outside of West Africa, where a months long outbreak has killed at least 3,500 people and sparked social unrest. . . . Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease expert at Vanderbilt University, said her case shows that health workers can be at risk not only in West Africa but in the sophisticated medical centers in Europe and the United States. . . . Rafael Perez Santamarina, the hospital's director, said authorities did not know yet how the nursing assistant got infected despite the use of internationally recognized precautions against Ebola." Yes, the whole "we're safe because Africans don't have our sophisticated health care" argument isn't looking exactly bulletproof.
'Humbled' NBC cameraman recovers from Ebola Published 22 Oct 2014 at 08.44 Viewed 173 Comments 0 Online news World Writer AFP WASHINGTON A US photojournalist said he was grateful to be alive after the hospital treating him declared him free of Ebola, in a minor victory over the virus that has killed more than 4,500 people. Liberian health workers are seen at the MSF Ebola treatment center in Monrovia, on October 18, 2014 Ashoka Mukpo, who was working as a freelance cameraman for NBC News in Monrovia, Liberia when he fell ill, will go home on Wednesday and also speak to the media. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo, 33, said in a hospital statement. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." The virus has killed more than 4,500 people in West Africa this year, and stoked fears that it could spread beyond the three worst hit countries Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, and become a global threat. Eight people including Mukpo have or are being treated for Ebola in the United States, one of whom, a man from Liberia, has died. Mukpo, who arrived at Nebraska Medical Center on October 6 and was able to walk off the plane that evacuated him from West Africa, added in the statement that he was not sure how he contracted the disease. "I was around a lot of sick people the week before I got sick," he said. "I thought I was keeping a good distance and wish I knew exactly what went wrong." A Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed negative blood test showed that Mukpo no longer had the virus in his bloodstream, the Nebraska Medicine statement said. No regrets Mukpo spent a little more than two weeks inside a biocontainment unit, but said he had no regrets. He had lived and worked in Liberia for a non governmental organization for two years before returning to the United States initially in May, and desperately wanted to return to Africa a few months later, his parents have said, describing him as "crazy." Mukpo went back to Liberia on September 4 and had begun freelancing for NBC News a day before he fell ill. "I don't regret going to Liberia to cover the crisis," he said. "That country was a second home to me and I had to help raise the alarm." There are growing fears in the United States about Ebola, for which there is no vaccine or any widely available cure. New measures go into effect Wednesday in the United States tightening restrictions on travelers arriving from the three West African countries gripped by the Ebola outbreak, funneling them into five airports with extra health checks. Mukpo was the second patient to be treated for the Ebola virus in Nebraska. Dr. Richard Sacra was declared virus free when he left the biocontainment unit on September 25. Dr. Phil Smith, medical director of the biocontainment unit at Nebraska Medicine Nebraska Medical Center, said "Our staff was confident it would be able to successfully care for another patient. "We've learned first hand that caring for a patient with the Ebola virus presents challenges you don't face in the regular hospital environment. "But our years of training on protocol in the unit and gaining familiarity with all the personal protective equipment was certainly an advantage for us." Tell us what you think about this article Like dislike 1 people liked 0 people disliked it Share this article More on this topic Tributes for Oscar de la Renta, who defined romantic glamour Published 21 Oct 2014 Total views 245 Turkey says only Syrian refugees can cross border to Kobane Published 16 Oct 2014 Total views 416 France faces EU budget showdown Published 16 Oct 2014 Total views 412 Europe gas supply faces 'major transit risks' Putin Published 16 Oct 2014 Total views 465 'Social activist' Monica Lewinsky joins Twitter Published 20 Oct 2014 Total views 679 Del Bosque to quit Spain job after Euro 2016 Published 17 Oct 2014 Total views 513 IS group has made 'substantial gains' in Iraq US Published 16 Oct 2014 Total views 439 Multiple arrests as Hong Kong demonstrators retake protest camp Published 18 Oct 2014 Total views 742 Nepal vows warning system after deadly Himalayan snowstorm Published 17 Oct 2014 Total views 732 Pistorius sentencing Live Report Published 21 Oct 2014 Total views 505 Transgender troops seek end to US military taboo Published 21 Oct 2014 Total views 230 Fernando Alonso leaving Ferrari, says outgoing president Published 16 Oct 2014 Total views 755 Other stories in this category 'Humbled' NBC cameraman recovers from Ebola Yahoo profit surges on Alibaba divestment, ... Deans backs Cheika to fill Wallabies hot seat North Korea frees detained American, two still ... Beating Madrid matters more than Liga record, ... NBC cameraman recovers from Ebola US hospital Bangkok Post online classifieds Try buying selling goods and properties 24 7 in our classifieds which has high purchasing power local expatriate audience from within Thailand and around the world.
OMAHA, Neb. (WPRI) A Rhode Island native who contracted Ebola while working in Liberia no longer has the virus in his bloodstream, Nebraska Medical Center confirmed Tuesday night. Ashoka Mukpo will be able to leave the hospital's biocontainment unit Wednesday morning after being the second patient successfully treated there for Ebola. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said in a statement. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Mukpo was covering the Ebola outbreak in Western Africa as a videographer for NBC News when he became infected. Mukpo spent a little more than two weeks in isolation at the medical center. During his treatment he received an experimental Ebola drug and a blood transfusion from someone who survived the disease.
WASHINGTON A freelance cameraman who contracted Ebola in Liberia will be released from the University of Nebraska Medical Center's Biocontainment Unit Wednesday morning after fully recovering from the deadly virus, hospital officials confirmed Tuesday night. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed that a hospital blood test showed Ashoka Mukpo, 33, has no trace of Ebola in his bloodstream. After more than two weeks in the isolation unit, he will be free to return to his Rhode Island home. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said in a statement. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Mukpo is the second person to recover from Ebola at the hospital, which is one of only four facilities in the country with a unit specially designed to safely treat the most dangerous viruses. Ebola patient Dr. Richard Sacra left the hospital's biocontainment unit virus free on Sept. 25. Mukpo, who was working for NBC News when he contracted the virus, said he was grateful for the life saving treatment he received. "I want to say a big thanks to the Nebraska Medical Center's medical staff," Mukpo said. "Amazing people. I'm profoundly lucky to have been treated by such professionals." Mukpo isn't sure how he contracted the disease. "I was around a lot of sick people the week before I got sick," he said. "I thought I was keeping a good distance and wish I knew exactly what went wrong." His ordeal hasn't changed his feelings about taking the assignment in the disease ravaged nation of Liberia. "I don't regret going to Liberia to cover the crisis. That country was a second home to me and I had to help raise the alarm," Mukpo said. Dr. Phil Smith, medical director of the hospital's biocontainment unit, said his staff was confident Mukpo would recover after he arrived at the hospital on Oct. 6. "We've learned first hand that caring for a patient with the Ebola virus presents challenges you don't face in the regular hospital environment," Smith said in a statement. "But our years of training on protocol in the unit and gaining familiarity with all the personal protective equipment was certainly an advantage for us." Meanwhile, in Spain, doctors reported that a nursing assistant who had contracted the disease also had been cured. Four tests had shown the virus was no longer in the bloodstream of Mar a Teresa Romero Ramos, 44. It was unclear when she would be released from the hospital, however.
WASHINGTON A freelance cameraman who contracted Ebola in Liberia will be released from the University of Nebraska Medical Center's Biocontainment Unit Wednesday morning after fully recovering from the deadly virus, hospital officials confirmed Tuesday night. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed that a hospital blood test showed Ashoka Mukpo, 33, has no trace of Ebola in his bloodstream. After more than two weeks in the isolation unit, he will be free to return to his Rhode Island home. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said in a statement. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Mukpo is the second person to recover from Ebola at the hospital, which is one of only four facilities in the country with a unit specially designed to safely treat the most dangerous viruses. Ebola patient Dr. Richard Sacra left the hospital's biocontainment unit virus free on Sept. 25. Mukpo, who was working for NBC News when he contracted the virus, said he was grateful for the life saving treatment he received. "I want to say a big thanks to the Nebraska Medical Center's medical staff," Mukpo said. "Amazing people. I'm profoundly lucky to have been treated by such professionals." Mukpo isn't sure how he contracted the disease. "I was around a lot of sick people the week before I got sick," he said. "I thought I was keeping a good distance and wish I knew exactly what went wrong." His ordeal hasn't changed his feelings about taking the assignment in the disease ravaged nation of Liberia. "I don't regret going to Liberia to cover the crisis. That country was a second home to me and I had to help raise the alarm," Mukpo said. Dr. Phil Smith, medical director of the hospital's biocontainment unit, said his staff was confident Mukpo would recover after he arrived at the hospital on Oct. 6. "We've learned first hand that caring for a patient with the Ebola virus presents challenges you don't face in the regular hospital environment," Smith said in a statement. "But our years of training on protocol in the unit and gaining familiarity with all the personal protective equipment was certainly an advantage for us." Meanwhile, in Spain, doctors reported that a nursing assistant who had contracted the disease also had been cured. Four tests had shown the virus was no longer in the bloodstream of Mar a Teresa Romero Ramos, 44. It was unclear when she would be released from the hospital, however.
WASHINGTON (AFP) A United States photojournalist said on Tuesday he was grateful to be alive after the hospital treating him declared him now free of Ebola, in a minor victory over the virus that has killed more than 4,500 people. Mr Ashoka Mukpo, who was working as a freelance cameraman for NBC News in Monrovia, Liberia when he fell ill, will go home on Wednesday and also speak to the media. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mr Mukpo, 33, said in a hospital statement. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Mr Mukpo, who arrived at Nebraska Medical Center on Oct 6 and was able to walk off the plane that evacuated him from West Africa, added in the statement that he was not sure how he contracted the disease. "I was around a lot of sick people the week before I got sick," he said. "I thought I was keeping a good distance and wish I knew exactly what went wrong." A Centres for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed negative blood test showed that Mr Mukpo no longer had the virus in his blood stream, the Nebraska Medicine statement said.
Serum made from the blood of recovered Ebola patients could be available within weeks in Liberia, one of the countries worst hit by the virus, says the World Health Organization. The BBC reports Speaking in Geneva, Dr Marie Paule Kieny said work was also advancing quickly to get drugs and a vaccine ready for January 2015. The Ebola outbreak has already killed more than 4,500 people. Most of the deaths have been in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Dr Kieny, WHO assistant director general for health system and innovation, said "There are partnerships which are starting to be put in place to have capacity in the three countries to safely extract plasma and make preparation that can be used for the treatment of infective patients. "The partnership which is moving the quickest will be in Liberia where we hope that in the coming weeks there will be facilities set up to collect the blood, treat the blood and be able to process it for use." It is still unclear how much will become available and whether it could meet demand. Freelance cameraman Ashoka Mukpo no longer has the Ebola virus in his bloodstream and will be allowed to leave Nebraska Medical Center, the hospital said Tuesday. CNN reports "Just got my results," Mukpo tweeted. "3 consecutive days negative. Ebola free and feeling so blessed. I fought and won, with lots of help. Amazing feeling." The 33 year old was working for NBC News when he tested positive for Ebola in Liberia. Mukpo was among a team working with Dr. Nancy Snyderman, the network's chief medical correspondent. Mukpo spent about two weeks at the hospital in Omaha, Nebraska. The hospital said he can head back home to Rhode Island on Wednesday. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," the hospital quoted Mukpo as saying. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Two nurses undergoing treatment for the virus also got good news on Tuesday. The National Institutes of Health said the condition of Nina Pham, a Texas nurse who contracted Ebola while caring for a patient, was upgraded from fair to good. Pham is at the NIH Hospital in Bethesda, Maryland.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 21 (Xinhua) A U.S. freelance cameraman who contracted Ebola in Liberia has been declared free of the virus, the U.S. hospital where he is being treated said Tuesday. A blood test, confirmed by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, showed that 33 year old Ashoka Mukpo no longer has the deadly virus in his body, the Nebraska Medical Center said. Mukpo will be discharged from the hospital on Wednesday morning. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said in a hospital statement, adding that "too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Mukpo was flown from Liberia to the Nebraska Medical Center on Oct. 6. He is the second patient to be successfully treated for Ebola at the hospital, and the fifth treated in the United States to fully recover. All the five patients contracted the virus in West Africa and were then brought back for treatment. Only Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person diagnosed with Ebola on U.S. soil, died of the virus. Two nurses who were infected while caring for Duncan are still being treated. The U.S. National Institutes of Health said Tuesday the clinical status of Nina Pham, one of the two nurses infected, has been upgraded from fair to good, but provided no other information.
Tuesday, 21 October 2014 (6 hours ago) Oct 21 (Reuters) Ebola patient Ashoka Mukpo, an NBC freelance cameraman, is free of the virus and will leave the Nebraska Medical Center on Wednesday, the hospital said. Mukpo, who arrived on Oct. 6, contracted the virus while working in West Africa. He is the second patient to be successfully treated for the Ebola virus at...
A U.S. freelance cameraman who contracted Ebola in Liberia has been declared free of the virus, the U.S. hospital where he is being treated said Tuesday. A blood test, confirmed by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, showed that 33 year old Ashoka Mukpo no longer has the deadly virus in his body, the Nebraska Medical Center said. Mukpo will be discharged from the hospital on Wednesday morning. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said in a hospital statement, adding that "too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Mukpo was flown from Liberia to the Nebraska Medical Center on Oct. 6. He is the second patient to be successfully treated for Ebola at the hospital, and the fifth treated in the United States to fully recover. All the five patients contracted the virus in West Africa and were then brought back for treatment. Only Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person diagnosed with Ebola on U.S. soil, died of the virus. Two nurses who were infected while caring for Duncan are still being treated. The U.S. National Institutes of Health said Tuesday the clinical status of Nina Pham, one of the two nurses infected, has been upgraded from fair to good, but provided no other information.
An American photographer, who contracted Ebola in Liberia, has been declared free of the virus. A blood test, confirmed by the US Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), revealed that 33 year old Ashoka Mukpo no longer has the deadly virus in his body, Xinhua reported. Mukpo will be discharged from the hospital later Wednesday. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said in a statement, adding that "too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive". Mukpo was flown from Liberia to the Nebraska Medical Center Oct 6. He is the second patient to be successfully treated for Ebola at the hospital, and the fifth in the US to fully recover. All the five patients had contracted the virus in West Africa and were then brought back for treatment. Only Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person diagnosed with Ebola on US soil, died of the virus. Two nurses who were infected while caring for Duncan are still being treated. The US National Institutes of Health Tuesday said the clinical status of Nina Pham, one of the two nurses infected, has been upgraded from fair to good.
Washington, Oct 22 (IANS) An American photographer, who contracted Ebola in Liberia, has been declared free of the virus. A blood test, confirmed by the US Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), revealed that 33 year old Ashoka Mukpo no longer has the deadly virus in his body, Xinhua reported. Mukpo will be discharged from the hospital later on Wednesday. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said in a statement, adding that "too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive". Mukpo was flown from Liberia to the Nebraska Medical Center Oct 6. He is the second patient to be successfully treated for Ebola at the hospital, and the fifth in the US to fully recover. All the five patients had contracted the virus in West Africa and were then brought back for treatment. Only Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person diagnosed with Ebola on US soil, died of the virus. Two nurses who were infected while caring for Duncan are still being treated. The US National Institutes of Health on Tuesday said the clinical status of Nina Pham, one of the two nurses infected, has been upgraded from fair to good. 2014 IANS India Private Limited. All Rights Reserved. The reproduction of the story photograph in any form will be liable for legal action.
The Nebraska Medical Center declared freelance video journalist Ashoka Mukpo Ebola free after he contracted the virus while working for NBC News in Liberia. According to reports, the 33 year old cameraman from Providence, Rhode Island will be released from Nebraska Medical Center's bio containment unit on Wednesday. Mukpo arrived at the medical facility in Omaha on October 6 after he tested positive for the disease while documenting the outbreak with NBC chief medical editor and correspondent Dr. Nancy Snyderman in the West African country of Liberia. The good news was confirmed by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) through a blood test. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling. Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive," the freelance journalist said via Twitter, expressing his utmost relief and hopes that other Ebola patients may be able to feel the same way too. He also posted on Twitter that though he is not sure how he contracted the disease, he does not regret returning to the Ebola stricken country to help in "raising the alarm" regarding the extent of the outbreak. Mukpo, Nebraska's second Ebola patient, is among the few who received plasma transfusion, a convalescent serum, from the blood donated by Dr. Kent Brantly, another American who survived the disease. Meanwhile, Nebraska Medical Center's bio containment unit director Dr. Phil Smith declared that they are ready to treat other Ebola patients, citing that their experience in caring for Mukpo has lent them firsthand information about Ebola. "Our staff was confident it would be able to successfully care for another patient. We've learned firsthand that caring for a patient with the Ebola virus presents challenges you don't face in the regular hospital environment," he stated. In return for surviving the dreaded disease which has a 50 percent mortality rate, Mukpo revealed that he would be launching a blog that documents his experiences through the disease titled "Ebola Diaries."
"Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Ashoka Mukpo, who was working as a freelance cameraman for NBC News in Monrovia when he fell ill, said in a hospital statement Tuesday. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." The virus has killed more than 4,500 people in West Africa this year, and stoked fears that it could spread beyond the three worst hit countries Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, and become a global threat. Eight people including Mukpo have or are being treated for Ebola in the United States, one of whom, a man from Liberia, has died. Mukpo added in the statement that he was not sure how he contracted the disease. "I was around a lot of sick people the week before I got sick," he said. "I thought I was keeping a good distance and wish I knew exactly what went wrong." A Centers for Disease Control and Prevention blood test showed that Mukpo no longer had the virus in his bloodstream, the Nebraska Medicine statement said. Mukpo arrived at Nebraska Medical Center on October 6, and was able to walk off the plane that evacuated him from West Africa.
Washington, Oct 22 (IANS) An American photographer, who contracted Ebola in Liberia, has been declared free of the virus. A blood test, confirmed by the US Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), revealed that 33 year old Ashoka Mukpo no longer has the deadly virus in his body, Xinhua reported. Mukpo will be discharged from the hospital later Wednesday. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said in a statement, adding that "too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive".
Ebola is now free of the virus and will be released soon, the Omaha hospital where he is being treated said Tuesday.A recent test showed Ashoka Mukpo's blood is negative for the virus, according to the Nebraska Medical Center. The test was confirmed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Mukpo will be allowed to leave the hospital's biocontainment unit Wednesday."Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said in a statement. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive."...
The NBC News cameraman who contracted Ebola while working in Liberia has been declared free of the virus, reports NBC News, citing the Nebraska Medical Center. Ashoka Mukpo will be allowed to leave a biocontainment unit at the hospital today, Wednesday, the story adds. A blood test confirmed that Mukpo, 33, doesn't have the virus in his bloodstream, allowing him to return to his home in Rhode Island. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said, according to a report from the hospital. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Mukpo is one of eight Americans who have been diagnosed with the disease, while the current outbreak is believed to have led to the deaths of more than 4,500 people worldwide.
The NBC videographer that was diagnosed with Ebola while doing freelance work for NBC in Liberia is now Ebola free. The CDC confirmed that Ashoka Mukpo had a negative blood test that proves that the virus is not in his bloodstream anymore, Yahoo reports. Mukpo has been released from Nebraska Medical Center where he had been receiving care since Oct. 6th after being evacuated from West Africa. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," said the 33 year old in a statement. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive. Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Mukpo was in Monrovia, Liberia covering the Ebola crisis for NBC when he became infected but is not sure of how he contracted the virus. "I was around a lot of sick people the week before I got sick. I thought I was keeping a good distance and wish I knew exactly what went wrong." Mukpo will be addressing the media soon. Share Share on FacebookClick to share on TwitterClick to share on RedditClick to share on PinterestMoreClick to share on LinkedInClick to email this to a friend Related
WASHINGTON A freelance cameraman who contracted Ebola in Liberia will be released from the University of Nebraska Medical Center's Biocontainment Unit on Wednesday morning after fully recovering from the deadly virus, hospital officials confirmed Tuesday night. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed that a hospital blood test showed Ashoka Mukpo, 33, has no trace of Ebola in his bloodstream. After more than two weeks in the isolation unit, he will be free to return to his Rhode Island home. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said in a statement. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Mukpo is the second person to recover from Ebola at the hospital, which is one of only four facilities in the country with a unit specially designed to safely treat the most dangerous viruses. Ebola patient Dr. Richard Sacra left the hospital's biocontainment unit virus free on Sept. 25. Mukpo, who was working for NBC News when he contracted the virus, said he was grateful for the life saving treatment he received. "I want to say a big thanks to the Nebraska Medical Center's medical staff," Mukpo said. "Amazing people. I'm profoundly lucky to have been treated by such professionals." Mukpo isn't sure how he contracted the disease. "I was around a lot of sick people the week before I got sick," he said. "I thought I was keeping a good distance and wish I knew exactly what went wrong." His ordeal hasn't changed his feelings about taking the assignment in the disease ravaged nation of Liberia. "I don't regret going to Liberia to cover the crisis. That country was a second home to me and I had to help raise the alarm," Mukpo said. Dr. Phil Smith, medical director of the hospital's biocontainment unit, said his staff was confident Mukpo would recover after he arrived at the hospital on Oct. 6. "We've learned first hand that caring for a patient with the Ebola virus presents challenges you don't face in the regular hospital environment," Smith said in a statement. "But our years of training on protocol in the unit and gaining familiarity with all the personal protective equipment was certainly an advantage for us." Meanwhile, in Spain, doctors reported that a nursing assistant who had contracted the disease also had been cured. Four tests had shown the virus was no longer in the bloodstream of Maria Teresa Romero Ramos, 44. It was unclear when she would be released from the hospital, however.
A US photojournalist said he was grateful to be alive after the hospital treating him declared him free of Ebola, in a minor victory over the virus that has killed more than 4,500 people. Ashoka Mukpo, who was working as a freelance cameraman for NBC News in Monrovia, Liberia when he fell ill, will go home on Wednesday and also speak to the media. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo, 33, said in a hospital statement. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." The virus has killed more than 4,500 people in West Africa this year, and stoked fears that it could spread beyond the three worst hit countries Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, and become a global threat. Eight people including Mukpo have or are being treated for Ebola in the United States, one of whom, a man from Liberia, has died. Mukpo, who arrived at Nebraska Medical Center on October 6 and was able to walk off the plane that evacuated him from West Africa, added in the statement that he was not sure how he contracted the disease. "I was around a lot of sick people the week before I got sick," he said. "I thought I was keeping a good distance and wish I knew exactly what went wrong." A Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed negative blood test showed that Mukpo no longer had the virus in his bloodstream, the Nebraska Medicine statement said. Mukpo spent a little more than two weeks inside a biocontainment unit, but said he had no regrets. He had lived and worked in Liberia for a non governmental organization for two years before returning to the United States initially in May, and desperately wanted to return to Africa a few months later, his parents have said, describing him as "crazy." Mukpo went back to Liberia on September 4 and had begun freelancing for NBC News a day before he fell ill. "I don't regret going to Liberia to cover the crisis," he said. "That country was a second home to me and I had to help raise the alarm." There are growing fears in the United States about Ebola, for which there is no vaccine or any widely available cure. New measures go into effect Wednesday in the United States tightening restrictions on travelers arriving from the three West African countries gripped by the Ebola outbreak, funneling them into five airports with extra health checks. Mukpo was the second patient to be treated for the Ebola virus in Nebraska. Dr. Richard Sacra was declared virus free when he left the biocontainment unit on September 25. Dr. Phil Smith, medical director of the biocontainment unit at Nebraska Medicine Nebraska Medical Center, said "Our staff was confident it would be able to successfully care for another patient. "We've learned first hand that caring for a patient with the Ebola virus presents challenges you don't face in the regular hospital environment. "But our years of training on protocol in the unit and gaining familiarity with all the personal protective equipment was certainly an advantage for us."
The American cameraman who contracted Ebola while covering the outbreak in Liberia as an NBC freelancer has been cleared of the virus and is due to leave the specialist unit in Omaha where he was nursed to health. Ashoka Mukpo, 33, has been receiving treatment at a biocontainment unit at Nebraska medical centre in Omaha since arriving in the US on 6 October. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed that Mukpo's blood test was negative, meaning the virus is no longer in his bloodstream. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling," Mukpo said in a statement. "Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Mukpo is one of eight Ebola patients who have been treated in the US. He said on Twitter that he does not know how he contracted the virus, but he does not regret covering the outbreak. "But I don't regret going to Liberia to cover the crisis. That country was a second home to me and I had to help raise the alarm," he said in the statement. Mukpo is the second Ebola patient to walk out of the Nebraska hospital virus free. Dr Rick Sacra, a family physician from Massachusetts who contracted the virus while caring for patients in Liberia, was released from the unit on 25 September. "Our staff was confident it would be able to successfully care for another patient," Dr Phil Smith, medical director of the biocontainment unit, said in a statement. "We've learned firsthand that caring for a patient with the Ebola virus presents challenges you don't face in the regular hospital environment. But our years of training on protocol in the unit and gaining familiarity with all the personal protective equipment was certainly an advantage for us." Mukpo received a blood transfusion from Ebola survivor Dr Kent Brantly, who also donated his blood to Sacra. Survivor's blood contains antibodies that are thought to help Ebola patients' immune systems fight the disease. Meanwhile, a Dallas nurse who contracted the virus while caring for Thomas Eric Duncan, America's Ebola patient zero, has been upgraded from "fair" to "good", the hospital said on Tuesday. Nina Pham's condition had dropped upon her arrival at the National Institutes for Health (NIH) specialist facility in Bethesda, Maryland, last week. Dr Anthony Fauci, the head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said at the time that the disease is fatiguing and Pham's journey from Texas to Maryland has exhausted her. A second nurse, Amber Vinson, is being treated at a similar facility at Emory University hospital in Atlanta. On Twitter, Mukpo wished the nurses well. There are only four biocontainment units in the US. They include Nebraska medical center in Omaha the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland Emory University hospital in Atlanta and St Patrick hospital in Missoula, Montana. The hospital statement said Mukpo would speak to reporters after his release. On Twitter, he said he would be happy to talk to the media, but only after he sees his family.
Freelance cameraman Ashoka Mukpo is said to be free of the Ebola virus and he shared his relief via social networking site Twitter. The NBC News photographer contracted the deadly virus while covering the Ebola crisis in Liberia, however, he tested negative for the virus he announced on Tuesday. Mukpo, 33, will be released from Nebraska Medical Center on Wednesday and he said he feels "blessed" to have recovered. "Just got my results. 3 consecutive days negative. Ebola free and feeling so blessed. I fought and won, with lots of help. Amazing feeling," Mukpo tweeted to his 6000 followers. "Recovering from Ebola is a truly humbling feeling. Too many are not as fortunate and lucky as I've been. I'm very happy to be alive." Mukpo spent two weeks being treated in a biocontainment unit and despite his ordeal, he said that he has "no regrets" about going to work in the Ebola plagued nation. "But I don't regret going to Liberia to cover the crisis. That country was a second home to me and I had to help raise the alarm," he wrote. It remains unclear how exactly Mukpo contracted Ebola, also known as Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF). In Liberia there have been 3,834 reported cases and 2,069 related deaths this year as of Oct.1 2014, according to CDC. "For the record no idea how I got it. It was something fluky. My best guess is I touched a surface and didn't chlorinate fast enough," he tweeted. "I was around a lot of sick people the week before I got sick. Thought I was keeping a good distance, wish I knew exactly what went wrong." The good news comes just one day after it was revealed that Texas nurse Nina Pham, who contracted Ebola while treating Thomas Eric Duncan (who died of the disease earlier this month), has improved. She is being treated at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and her condition has been updated from fair to good. Her coworker, Amber Vinson, who also contracted the disease while treating Duncan, is being treated at Emory University in Atlanta. "Still thinking about those nurses. Look forward to the day you two get news like this too...," Mukpo wrote. On Tuesday, a passenger traveling to the US from Liberia was evaluated for signs of Ebola. The male Liberian national reportedly landed at Newark Liberty International Airport on Tuesday and showed symptoms of the deadly virus. No word on his condition has been released.
FORT KENT, Maine (AP) In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Thursday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. At their home, reporters have been camped out for two days. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million. Associated Press writers David Sharp and Patrick Whittle in Portland contributed to this story.
FORT KENT, Maine (AP) In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Thursday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. At their home, reporters have been camped out for two days. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million. Associated Press writers David Sharp and Patrick Whittle in Portland contributed to this story. Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
Nurse Kaci Hickox leaves her home on a rural road in Fort Kent, Maine, to take a bike ride with her boyfriend Ted Wilbur, Thursday, Oct. 30, 2014. The couple went on an hour long ride followed by a Maine State Trooper. State officials are going to court to keep Hickox in quarantine for the remainder of the 21 day incubation period for Ebola that ends on Nov. 10. Police are monitoring her, but can't detain her without a court order signed by a judge. FORT KENT, Maine In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Thursday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. At their home, reporters have been camped out for two days. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million.
FORT KENT, Maine In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Thursday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. ADDS RESTRICTION THAT AP MEMBERS MAY NOT USE THE PHOTO IN THEIR ONLINE EDITIONS Kaci Hickox, a nurse who treated Ebola patients in West Africa, left, and boyfriend Ted Wilbur take questions from the media outside her home in Fort Kent, Maine, on Wednesday, Oct. 29, 2014. Hickox, the first person forced into New Jersey's mandatory quarantine for people arriving at the Newark airport from three West African countries, vowed to defy Maine's voluntary quarantine. (AP Photo Portland Press Herald, Whitney Hayward) MANDATORY CREDIT. FOR PRINT EDITIONS ONLY. NOT FOR ONLINE USE. At their home, reporters have been camped out for two days. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million. Associated Press writers David Sharp and Patrick Whittle in Portland contributed to this story.
FORT KENT, Maine (AP) In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Thursday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. At their home, reporters have been camped out for two days. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million.
1 CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 1 COMMENTEMAILMORE Fort Kent, Maine In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Thursday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. At their home, reporters have been camped out for two days. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million. 1 CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 1 COMMENTEMAILMORE Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed. Read or Share this story http detne.ws 1wMD32Z
In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Thursday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. At their home, reporters have been camped out for two days. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million. (Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.)
In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Thursday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. At their home, reporters have been camped out for two days. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million.
FORT KENT, Maine Maine health officials have asked a court to limit the movements of nurse Kaci Hickox, who defied a voluntary quarantine for medical workers who have treated Ebola patients. Officials filed documents Thursday, following through with a threat to try to isolate her. A judge has issued a temporary order until a ruling which is expected today. For now, police are monitoring Hickox and her public interactions but cannot detain her. The quarantine attempt is shaping up as the nation's biggest test case yet in the struggle to balance public health and fear of Ebola against personal freedom. In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear today whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. This morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million.
FORT KENT, Maine (AP) In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Friday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Friday morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million. Associated Press writers David Sharp and Patrick Whittle in Portland contributed to this story.
In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Friday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Friday morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million. Associated Press writers David Sharp and Patrick Whittle in Portland contributed to this story.
FORT KENT, Maine (AP) In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Friday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Friday morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million.
Bike ride is latest show of defiance as Kaci Hickox's resistance evolves into clear clash of personal freedom vs. fear of Ebola. Fort Kent, ME (CBS News) Maine health officials have asked a court to limit the movements of nurse Kaci Hickox, who defied a voluntary quarantine for medical workers who have treated Ebola patients. Officials filed documents Thursday, following through with a threat to try to isolate her. A judge has issued a temporary order until a ruling expected Friday. For now, police are monitoring Hickox and her public interactions but cannot detain her. The quarantine attempt is shaping up as the nation's biggest test case yet in the struggle to balance public health and fear of Ebola against personal freedom. Hickox, who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, says confinement violates her rights. She says that she has no symptoms and poses no risk to the public. In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in the standoff. Hickox and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. If state officials do obtain a court order for Hickox to be confined, she says she's prepared to fight it, reports CBS News correspondent Don Dahler. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. "She's pushing my patience, she's pushing my patience," he added. " ... "Two or three times (she said) she'd accept something, then she'd backtrack, so she just doesn't want any restrictions." Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. At their home, reporters have been camped out for two days. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels.
FORT KENT, Maine (AP) Maine health officials have asked a court to limit the movements of nurse Kaci Hickox, who defied a voluntary quarantine for medical workers who have treated Ebola patients. Officials filed documents Thursday, following through with a threat to try to isolate her. A judge has issued a temporary order until a ruling expected Friday. For now, police are monitoring Hickox and her public interactions but cannot detain her. The quarantine attempt is shaping up as the nation's biggest test case yet in the struggle to balance public health and fear of Ebola against personal freedom. Hickox, who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, says confinement violates her rights. She says that she has no symptoms and poses no risk to the public. THIS IS A BREAKING NEWS UPDATE. Check back soon for further information. AP's earlier story is below. In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Friday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Friday morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million. Associated Press writers David Sharp and Patrick Whittle in Portland contributed to this story. Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
FORT KENT, Maine (AP) Maine health officials have asked a court to limit the movements of nurse Kaci Hickox, who defied a voluntary quarantine for medical workers who have treated Ebola patients. Officials filed documents Thursday, following through with a threat to try to isolate her. A judge has issued a temporary order until a ruling expected Friday. For now, police are monitoring Hickox and her public interactions but cannot detain her. The quarantine attempt is shaping up as the nation's biggest test case yet in the struggle to balance public health and fear of Ebola against personal freedom. Hickox, who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, says confinement violates her rights. She says that she has no symptoms and poses no risk to the public. THIS IS A BREAKING NEWS UPDATE. Check back soon for further information. AP's earlier story is below. In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Friday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Friday morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million.
FORT KENT, Maine Maine health officials have asked a court to limit the movements of nurse Kaci Hickox, who defied a voluntary quarantine for medical workers who have treated Ebola patients. Officials filed documents Thursday, following through with a threat to try to isolate her. A judge signed a temporary order Thursday limiting Hickox's movement until a further court order expected Friday. For now, police are monitoring Hickox and her public interactions but cannot detain her. Hickox, who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, says confinement violates her rights. She says that she has no symptoms and poses no risk to the public. The state is seeking to limit her travel, keep her out of public places, and require a 3 foot buffer if she comes into contact with people. Reported earlier In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Friday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Friday morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million.
FORT KENT, Maine Maine health officials have asked a court to limit the movements of nurse Kaci Hickox, who defied a voluntary quarantine for medical workers who have treated Ebola patients. Officials filed documents Thursday, following through with a threat to try to isolate her. A judge has issued a temporary order until a ruling expected Friday. For now, police are monitoring Hickox and her public interactions but cannot detain her. The quarantine attempt is shaping up as the nation's biggest test case yet in the struggle to balance public health and fear of Ebola against personal freedom. Hickox, who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, says confinement violates her rights. She says that she has no symptoms and poses no risk to the public. THIS IS A BREAKING NEWS UPDATE. Check back soon for further information. AP's earlier story is below. In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Friday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Friday morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million. Associated Press writers David Sharp and Patrick Whittle in Portland contributed to this story.
FORT KENT, Maine (AP) Maine health officials have asked a court to limit the movements of nurse Kaci Hickox, who defied a voluntary quarantine for medical workers who have treated Ebola patients. Officials filed documents Thursday, following through with a threat to try to isolate her. A judge has issued a temporary order until a ruling expected Friday. For now, police are monitoring Hickox and her public interactions but cannot detain her. The quarantine attempt is shaping up as the nation's biggest test case yet in the struggle to balance public health and fear of Ebola against personal freedom. Hickox, who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, says confinement violates her rights. She says that she has no symptoms and poses no risk to the public. THIS IS A BREAKING NEWS UPDATE. Check back soon for further information. AP's earlier story is below. In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Friday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Friday morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million. Associated Press writers David Sharp and Patrick Whittle in Portland contributed to this story. Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
FORT KENT, Maine Maine health officials have asked a court to limit the movements of nurse Kaci Hickox, who defied a voluntary quarantine for medical workers who have treated Ebola patients. Officials filed documents Thursday, following through with a threat to try to isolate her. A judge has issued a temporary order until a ruling expected Friday. For now, police are monitoring Hickox and her public interactions but cannot detain her. The quarantine attempt is shaping up as the nation's biggest test case yet in the struggle to balance public health and fear of Ebola against personal freedom. Hickox, who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, says confinement violates her rights. She says that she has no symptoms and poses no risk to the public. THIS IS A BREAKING NEWS UPDATE. Check back soon for further information. AP's earlier story is below. In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, nurse Kaci Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. But it was unclear Friday whether the state had gone to court or whether there had been any progress in negotiations aimed at a compromise. Friday morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million. Associated Press writers David Sharp and Patrick Whittle in Portland contributed to this story.
WASHINGTON FORT KENT, MAINE The confrontation between the state of Maine and a nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone heated up on Friday when a judge issued a temporary order enforcing a quarantine after she defied state officials and took a bike ride. The order from Charles LaVerdiere, chief judge of the Maine District Court, instructs nurse Kaci Hickox to submit to "direct active monitoring," and "not to be present in public places" like shopping centers, movie theaters or workplaces except to receive necessary health care. The temporary order permits her to engage in what the judge called "non congregate public activities" like walking or jogging in the park but instructs her to maintain a 3 foot (1 meter) distance from other people. The quarantine confrontation between Hickox and Maine has become the focal point of a struggle between several U.S. states opting for stringent measures to guard against Ebola and a federal government wary of discouraging potential medical volunteers to fight the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. Until now, police had been monitoring Hickox and her public interactions but were unable to detain her. On Friday morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. The quarantine attempt is shaping up as the nation's biggest test case yet in the struggle to balance public health and fear of Ebola against personal freedom. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles (1,000 km) to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them.
FORT KENT, Maine A Maine judge has rejected a bid by state health officials to restrict the movement of nurse Kaci Hickox, who defied a quarantine for medical workers who have treated Ebola patients. Judge Charles C. LaVerdiere ruled today that she should continue daily monitoring and coordinate travel with state officials so monitoring can continue. But, because she's not showing symptoms, the judge says she's not infectious. The state went to court Thursday to impose restrictions until the 21 day incubation period for Ebola ends on Nov. 10. Hickox, who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, contended confinement at her home in northern Maine violated her rights. She also contended it's not necessary because she poses no risk. She defied the state's voluntary quarantine by holding a news conference and going for a bike ride. Officials filed documents Thursday, following through with a threat to try to isolate her. A judge has issued a temporary order until a ruling expected today. For now, police are monitoring Hickox and her public interactions but cannot detain her. The quarantine attempt is shaping up as the nation's biggest test case yet in the struggle to balance public health and fear of Ebola against personal freedom. In between going on a bike ride and taking delivery of a pizza, Hickox and her boyfriend did chores and watched a movie while state officials struggled to reach a compromise in a standoff that has become the nation's most closely watched clash between personal freedom and fear of Ebola. The nurse who treated Ebola patients in Sierra Leone and her boyfriend, Ted Wilbur, purposefully rode their bikes away from town on a dirt path to avoid coming into contact with people. "We're not trying to push any limits here. We're members of this community, too, and we want to make people comfortable," he told reporters Thursday evening. Hickox, who returned to the U.S. last week, has been under what Maine is calling a voluntary quarantine at her home in this town of 4,300 people. She has rebelled against the restrictions, saying that her rights are being violated and that she is no threat to others because she has no symptoms. She tested negative last weekend for Ebola, though it can take days for the virus to reach detectable levels. State officials said that they were seeking a court order to require a quarantine through Nov. 10, the end of the 21 day incubation period for the Ebola virus. This morning, Fort Kent Police Chief Tom Pelletier went inside the home briefly and said afterward, "We just had a good conversation." He said he was not there to arrest or detain Hickox. Gov. Paul LePage said state attorneys and Hickox's lawyers had discussed a scaled down quarantine that would have allowed her to go for walks, runs and bicycle rides while preventing her from venturing into populated public places or coming within 3 feet of others. "I was ready and willing and remain ready and willing to reasonably address the needs of health care workers meeting guidelines to assure the public health is protected," he said. Hickox stepped into the media glare when she returned from West Africa to become subject to a mandatory quarantine in New Jersey. After an uproar, she was released and traveled more than 600 miles to the small town on the Canadian border where she lives with her boyfriend. Reporters have camped out at their home. Wilbur said he and Hickox spent the day Thursday vacuuming, cleaning, doing laundry and watching a movie, "The Avengers." He said he also spent four hours attending class via phone. He has agreed to stay away from the University of Maine at Fort Kent for the time being. During their hour long bike ride, they were followed by an unmarked state police cruiser. Later, they took delivery of a pizza. States have broad authority under long established law to quarantine people to prevent the spread of disease. In Maine, state law allows a judge to confine someone if health officials demonstrate "a clear and immediate public health threat." President Barack Obama and humanitarian groups have warned that such measures could cripple the fight against the disease at its source by discouraging volunteers like Hickox from going to West Africa, where the outbreak has sickened more than 13,000 people and killed nearly 5,000 of them. "The volunteers are heroes to the people they help, and they are heroes to our own countries. They should be treated like heroes when they return," Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said in Brussels. In other developments Ebola fears infected a medical conference on the subject. Louisiana state health officials told thousands of doctors planning to attend a tropical diseases meeting this weekend in New Orleans to stay away if they have been to certain African countries or have had contact with an Ebola patient in the last 21 days. Liberia is making some progress in containing the outbreak, while Sierra Leone is "in a crisis situation which is going to get worse," the top anti Ebola officials in the two countries said. The World Bank announced it will give an additional 100 million to help bring in more foreign health workers. That raises the money it has given to the fight to 500 million.
